---
title: "IPython: Python at Your Fingertips"
summary: "Talk at PyCon US 2012"
date: 2012-03-09T00:00:00
tags: ["talk", "transcript"]
slug: 2012-03-09-pycon-2012-talk
word_count: 6865
source_file: transcripts/2012-03-09-pycon-2012-talk.md
content_type: transcript
event: "PyCon US 2012"
video_url: "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=26wgEsg9Mcc"
---

*This transcript was AI-generated using Whisper and may contain minor errors.*

## Transcript

Hello everyone. I am very happy to be here. This is my first PyCon, and some of you may have seen our tutorial on IPython a few days ago. We were able to get a last minute slot for a talk, and it's great to see some new faces here. I am going to do a talk in two parts. First, I will do a brief overview of the project, and then a bit of a high-wire act with actual demos, which is obviously what they tell you never to do in a talk, but we'll see. You'll watch me crash and burn.

So, I am going to tell you a little bit about the IPython project, which is a project that I started years ago, and where now a group of developers have joined me in trying to make the best possible use of the Python language while working interactively. The I in IPython is for interactive, and the reason, the motivation for it comes from my own background and the background of several of the other developers. We're scientists. Several of us are physicists in the team, and in scientific computing, the kinds of work we do with computers are rarely with a well-defined task in advance. We tend to work with data. We have libraries. We have tools. We plot things. We ask new questions, and rarely do we have a well-defined specification to code against. So, having interactive tools that let us directly play with the data is extremely important for us.

However, exploratory computing is not just for scientists, and I'd like to make the point that IPython, even though we do a lot of work for scientific computing, there's nothing inherently scientific about it, and it should be a tool that could make many of you also productive while you work with Python and get you closer to the language, get you closer to the tools.

Python is a great language for interactive work. The language doesn't require you to declare variables. There's very little boilerplate. It has great introspection capabilities. However, the default interactive environment is just the starting point. It's kind of limited. When you're working interactively in a computer, one of the most natural things to want to do is to look at your files. Well, that doesn't work. You have imported something. You'd like to find out about it. The shortest amount of typing doesn't tell you. Obviously, there are ways of seeing your files. There are ways of finding information about objects, but they require too much typing. You try to run a script, and you use the familiar tilde syntax, and that doesn't work. You run a script that has an error, and you get error messages that contain information, but that could certainly be improved. While working interactively, all these things matter, and we spend hours and hours at the interactive console. We think we can do better, and over the years, we've tried to do better.

So in IPython, if you type `ls` with standard Unix wildcards, you see something that makes kind of sense. If you ask for information about the `os` module with `os?`, IPython, using the machinery that the language provides already, will do its best to tell you everything it can about it. Where is it defined? Where did it come from? What docstrings are in it? Et cetera.

If you're curious, and you would like to know more about an object, you can type two question marks, and IPython will basically do its best to dig deeper when possible. The language offers the `inspect` module, which is designed basically to allow you to drill into its own machinery, and IPython will show you the source code for any object that you want, syntax highlighted, properly formatted, not only at the module level. You can ask for source code from a function. You can even ask for source code for a function you defined interactively. That's something that Python can't do by default. We've played a few tricks to make that possible.

So when you run code, 99% of the time, you spend your time debugging, not getting results. So when things go wrong, it's important that the error messages that you get are easy to read and informative. This is what a traceback from IPython looks like by default, and you can even ask for IPython to give you values of all of your variables at the point of the exception automatically so that you quickly find out, understand what's going on. I personally find this far more informative, and I hope you'll agree with me that it is.

So we have had this for a long time. This is the terminal-based IPython. A quick show of hands, how many of you have used IPython at the terminal? So quite a few of you, and most of you have used this. How many of you have used the new Qt console? Much less. And how many of you have used the web notebook? Actually kind of a comparable number. That makes me happy because the web notebook is only two months old. So that makes us very, very happy.

For a long time all we had was the interactive terminal-based IPython, but we realized that if we have the right communications machinery, we could abstract the idea of executing Python code and communicate -- if we could transfer that information and all of the events necessary to make that work well with a suitable network transport, we could build other clients. And about two years ago, we discovered ZeroMQ. Brian Granger and Min Ragan-Kelley, two of our core developers, went ahead and in just a few days developed the PyZMQ bindings. And based on that, we've been able to separate the terminal IPython console that you already know. That remains available, but we've been able to abstract that code out so it can run in its own process, which we call a kernel. And then different types of clients can communicate. We currently have a terminal client, a Qt console client, a web notebook. And in addition, these kernels broadcast a lot of information so that monitoring clients can be built.

So now the collection of clients that we have includes the old-style IPython that I was showing before, which has for many years included support for interactive visualization. That's important to us. That means that we have to basically cooperate with the event loops of Qt, GTK, WX, Tk, and the native OS X Cocoa GUI event loop. And we've done that so that interactive data visualizations with matplotlib are possible.

But now we also have this new Qt console, which was developed a little over a year and a half ago with the support of Enthought, who provided support and development from one of their developers, which provides something that feels a lot like a console. We like the console workflow. We like typing just one command and getting results right away. When you open this by default, you could even think that it's actually a text terminal emulator. It looks like a terminal emulator, except that it's actually a Qt rich text widget capable of displaying inline graphs, of doing multi-line editing, which is impossible at a text terminal, of doing syntax highlighting, of showing graphical tooltips. So we've basically tried to build the best that we can from the workflow of a console, but with some of the rich properties that you want in a GUI toolkit.

Based on this architecture, we had a meeting with Microsoft a little over a year ago. And they actually, once we explained what the communications protocol was, they developed their own client, which lives inside of Microsoft Visual Studio and which provides an IPython console within the Visual Studio Python plugin. So I'm not a user of Visual Studio, but this is a freely downloadable plugin for Visual Studio that provides Python support. And this code -- this is not written in Python. This client is written in whatever Visual Studio is developed with, and they've done an absolutely spectacular job. We only had one meeting with them. We explained to them -- Travis Oliphant was at that meeting -- we explained to Dino and Shahrokh what the communications protocol was and what our Qt console code was, and we never heard from them. Next thing we know, the whole thing was released. They never had to ask us a question. They never bothered us on the list. It basically just worked based on the spec of our protocol. And Dino, the author of that, is sitting right there with Brian Granger.

And finally, all of this was leading to something we had wanted to do for a very long time. Brian Granger and myself are both physicists. We cut our teeth in grad school using the Mathematica notebook, which some of you may know about. And we have finally, based on this architecture, last summer, Brian was able to spend a lot of time building a web interface for IPython, which uses the exact same machinery, but which lets you execute code through the web browser, talking to the same kernel, with the advantage that this web notebook is capable of containing rich text, code cells where you execute code just like you would normally in IPython, the results of those computations, plots, and basically anything that a modern web browser is capable of displaying, you can put in there.

But finally, there's one more thing. We have the same abstractions and communications machinery that we use to control a single interactive instance, and it's used in IPython to control actually multiple engines. We have machinery for very high-level and easy-to-use parallel computing, where what we have done is expose an abstraction that we call an IPython cluster, which consists of one object called the IPython controller, and N instances of a process called the IPython engine, which communicate with this controller. And all of these processes are persistent. You start them and you let them running. They could be running on a multi-core laptop, or they could be running on a supercomputer, or they could be running on an Amazon EC2 cluster that you have deployed.

And then you connect to the controller with a client library that effectively proxies these engines and allows you to submit code for execution and get things going on your cluster, retrieve data for local analysis. Multiple client connections can happen at any time. So you can call a colleague in, say over the phone or over Skype, and tell them to come in and have a look at some of your data because you're puzzled. You can disconnect, go home, reconnect again to your cluster and see how things are doing. And all the while, this machinery continues working.

This is elaborate enough that an entire third of our tutorial was devoted to showing how it works. I can't do justice to the system right here. This is the second iteration of a system that we have. The first version of it was written by Min Ragan-Kelley as a senior thesis here at Santa Clara University where he was an undergraduate. And last year, while Brian and myself and Evan Patterson were doing the Qt console rework of the underlying architecture, Min basically, in a couple of months, rewrote completely the entire Twisted machinery to function on top of ZeroMQ -- one of the most amazing feats of development that I've ever seen.

So a very, very brief history of the project. In October 2001, I promised myself that I would take a break from my thesis so that it would be just an afternoon hack. 259 lines of code. It was a Python startup file that gave me the Mathematica prompts that I wanted and the caching of previous results. 12 years later, I'm still working on it.

But at the beginning, that was just my personal hack. And I found out about two other projects, IPP and LazyPython, also written by two scientists, that gave other interactive capabilities to Python. I contacted the authors. I offered them to join forces and collaborate. They both said they had other priorities at the time, but they were very gracious and let me use their code. And so I merged these three pieces of code into what became the original IPython.

In 2002, John Hunter contacted me and asked me to improve the gnuplot support that I had with better MATLAB-style syntax. And fortunately, I did have the common sense of telling him that I did have to graduate or I'd be kicked out of the country. Remember, a foreign student in the U.S. -- it's not always easy. And John instead took the hint that he should write a better plotting library than the other 30 that existed at the time, and thus was born matplotlib, which is one of the cornerstones of Python's scientific computing stack.

In 2004, Brian and I met after one of the SciPy conferences. We had gone to grad school together. And Min, who was a student of Brian's at the time, started working on the parallel computing code. And ever since, Brian, Min, and I have formed sort of the core of the project's development team.

Between 2005 and 2009, we had sort of a slowish development period. Unfortunately, the code was very monolithic and hard to clean and work with, but some developments were made. And towards the end of this period, a very important refactoring was undertaken that allowed us, in 2010 -- something that worked very well, just perfect serendipity -- we discovered ZeroMQ, and it landed at the perfect time after we had refactored the core. And we obtained support from Enthought to develop, on top of ZeroMQ, this communications architecture to build on top of it the Qt console. We also moved from Launchpad to Git and GitHub, and this has been fantastic for us. After us, most of the scientific computing and Python projects have also moved to GitHub, and the synergies that that is giving us are extraordinary.

Min, as I said, rewrote the parallel support on top of ZeroMQ. And a new developer, Thomas Kluyver, turned out to be extraordinarily productive and joined us initially to do the Python 3 port and has become also one of the key members of the team. And finally, in 2011, we released the web notebook that I'll show you more about.

A very quick cast of characters. We have over 140 commit authors in the project at this point in the log. The people in boldface are sort of the core developers, and those in blue are simply because they're here. So if you want to talk to us, you can come later to our booth.

A very rapid overview of the size of the project. It has grown. As I said, it started as 250 lines of code, and we're well over 100,000, so it's not a small project anymore. It is fairly widely used. A number of scientific projects use IPython. And when I say use, I don't mean that there are people who use it at these institutions, but rather there are projects built upon IPython at these places. People who use it are probably everywhere there's Python used for science. But there are also, as I said earlier, non-scientific projects that use it, and it's important because I know that not all of you are scientists or engineers. This is PyCon and not SciPy.

We have received support, as I mentioned before, very importantly from Enthought. From the beginning, Enthought has been a big supporter of the project. They've supported us in many ways, and we really appreciate that. Others as well -- Microsoft, Shahrokh and Dino, who are here, did the great job that I already mentioned. We've had a little bit of federal funding, and right now we do have some reasonably steady funding from the DoD, and we hope to get more of that.

So in summary, before I switch to the demo work, in brief, what do we try to offer for Python work? We try to offer you a much better shell, a kernel that you can embed in your own codes and a set of clients to talk to these kernels, and high-level parallel computing tools. So this is the URL of the project. It should be easy enough to Google, and I am going to switch perfectly on time to some demos.

### Demo: The Web Notebook

So this is the website for the project, and I'm going to start the demos not at the console, since most of you have seen that, but at the new web notebook, which many of you haven't. So when you start the web notebook, this is what you see. It presents you with an interface running in Google Chrome. It's running on my local machine, but you can run it remotely. You can enable SSL and password protection if you want to put it on a publicly facing IP address. It shows you two tabs, one with your notebooks, and another one with clusters, and we will come back to this towards the end of the demonstration.

But first, the notebooks are documents. These are files. I'm going to start with, as I said, a bit of a high-wire act. We are going to look at what Twitter is saying about PyCon right now. I've been running this code through the morning, and it's been very interesting to see the evolution of the graph that results at the end.

So this is what we have here -- a text cell. I type Markdown in there, and it gets rendered as I exit the cell, and these cells are IPython cells, and whatever code you type in there is executed by IPython just as if you were at the terminal. So I'm loading the Twitter API. Now I'm running a simple query on the hashtag PyCon, and I'm going to let it query at most 30 pages, and I'm simply going to let it filter out retweets from real tweets.

So there it ran, and it says it read 16 pages, and it found 153 tweets with the hashtag PyCon and 72 retweets. So now we filter a little bit of noise. In text like this, there's always a lot of words that are not very interesting, and with Python tools, it's very simple to compute. These are just a couple of dictionary tricks to compute some summary statistics of word frequency on the 15 most frequent words and to build a graph of co-occurrences of those.

So we're going to try to see what is the word distribution of what people are saying in the last half hour or so on Twitter about PyCon, and we will see not only the distribution of words, but also what is said in the same tweet. What kind of relationships do we see? We use the NetworkX graph library, for which I think there's been more than one tutorial here, and then we simply print a summary.

So right now, from the data set that comes out of Twitter, we have 818 unique words. Typically, the stuff at the bottom, the least frequent words, are not very interesting. You often see unique short URLs. These are the most frequent words from the set, and now we can build a graph and look at the structure of this graph.

First of all, I'm going to look at the frequency of the words. These are the most frequent words, and typically what you see is -- and I have removed PyCon, because if you leave PyCon in there, that completely dominates the figure. But in general, you see distributions that look like this, extremely sharply peaked on a few words, and then the rest is very, very shallow.

But if we look at what things are said together -- these are the things that right now people are saying together. So I don't know who Aidan Gazit is, but that user seems to be trending a lot. There's a lot of "great talk." Paul's name is now appearing a lot less -- in the morning after his keynote, which must have been very good, I didn't see it, there was a lot. The graph was centered around that. But "booth" was not appearing too much. All the booth vendors were busy setting up. Now all the booth vendors are busy saying, "come to our booth." And you see the word "come" and the word "booth" together. Everybody over there is busy tweeting, "come to our booth." And so are we, by the way.

So this is the kind of thing that you can run in a few minutes. Now, these documents can be saved. You can put them on GitHub for version control. You can email them to a colleague. As I said, you can even turn on password protection and invite a colleague to work collaboratively with you on the same document. Think of it as Google Docs but with a brain, with a Python brain. And everything that you have done in Python and that you've ever done in IPython works in one of these cells.

### Demo: Notebook Features Tour

Furthermore, these documents can do other things. Now that you've seen one actual example, I'm going to give you a bit of a tour of the things that this notebook can do. Just to reiterate -- I will remove all output. Again, high-wire act. And we're going to start completely fresh here.

So if you type `pwd`, the kinds of things that you expect to be able to type in IPython, they work. IPython, as many of you probably do know, is a bit of a mix of the language and the shell. So if you define a Python variable and then you say exclamation mark, which goes to the shell, but you put a dollar sign, you actually interpolate the Python variable into the shell. So instead of having to suffer the ignominies of looping in the shell, you can do it in a civilized language like Python and still call system commands to do the last bit of work.

We activate plotting. And you already saw a little bit of this. We have very good support for matplotlib plots, so you can keep inline figures. But we can also do things like -- you're studying, you're trying to learn, and you see a bit of code, either from an email or from one of the tutorials, and you paste code that had the classic Python prompt. We actually filter all that for you so that you can paste input code and still execute it without having to manually remove prompts, which is very annoying.

If you run a non-existent file, we actually highlight standard error so that errors are easier to read. Tracebacks, as I said before, are the same kinds of tracebacks that you get in IPython, so they're very informative and with all the details. If you run code, we actually fetch asynchronously output from the kernel. So here, I'm running a cell which is asynchronously printing, and as it prints, we actually do get the output of the kernel asynchronously, thanks to the beauties of ZeroMQ.

Now here, I'm going to play a little trick with ctypes, which will actually segfault my kernel. So that little bit of code segfaults. And after a couple of seconds, the system detects, well, your kernel died. Obviously, the data that you had in memory, the variables, are gone, because that process is dead. But at least the state of your document isn't, and you can kindly restart your kernel and get back to work. There's a separation between the document and the execution state. We can't preserve the segfaulted kernel, but we can save your notebook.

The Markdown cells can contain formatted code. So this is a cell. This is what you type in Markdown. If you indent four spaces, you can put source code -- source code in Python, source code in C. And when you get out of there, Markdown is properly rendered and syntax highlighted.

Furthermore, you can put mathematics. This, for us, is very important. You can put LaTeX. And we use the phenomenal MathJax library to render LaTeX both in inline mode and in displayed equation mode. That may not matter to everyone, but for us, it is important.

Now furthermore, we have extended -- as you see here, I am returning an object whose display representation, this is exactly like I would get the output if I printed a computation. What we've done is we've extended the notion of Python's repr of objects into a protocol that allows objects to define their own representation. And their representation can be graphical. It can be PNG. It can be SVG. It can be LaTeX. It can be JavaScript. So we've extended the notion of how Python objects can represent themselves. The default repr is meant to be a string. But you can define representations both for your own classes, if you follow our protocol, and you can add a layer of representations for objects that you didn't write, by defining a type-based callback registry, where you basically layer your own representations on top of existing objects.

So this is an image object whose representation is a graphic. And the image class can also work with remote data. So in here, I'm giving it the URL of the actual Python logo from the Python website. We have an SVG class. I just downloaded a static copy of the Python SVG logo, and it renders it equally well.

Furthermore, we have video. You can embed -- this is an actual YouTube video that will play, if the network is good enough. It's from a talk that I gave a while ago. So you can imagine writing tutorials. You can imagine creating documentation where you have a video, the person pauses it, then they work through a problem if you want to screencast with built-in exercises. Now currently, this is using YouTube, which means it's using Flash, the embedded YouTube player. But browsers are getting to the point where they support embedded video. And so here, what we have is a local file. I'm opening a file called `animation.m4v`, which is a local file. I'm reading the data. I'm encoding it in Base64. And if I run this cell, Chrome loads a local video. So you don't have to put your things on YouTube. It's a little tricky to get it to work. We haven't figured out all the encoding details. But we know that browser video is getting better.

You can even embed, as I said, anything that a web browser can. So this is actually an embedded copy of the Wikipedia mobile page. And we can search in Wikipedia. This is the Wikipedia search for Python. So you can imagine putting other content in your live documents that refer to other things. As long as they're in the web and an iframe will support it, you can put them in there.

### Demo: SymPy Integration

Finally, the mathematics support that I mentioned earlier -- before we showed how to type mathematics into Markdown cells. That's when you are typing. But the representation protocol that we have extends to math. So this is an object whose representation is LaTeX and provides a mathematical view. And so based on that, we have built extensions for the SymPy symbolic computing system so that you can run all of the SymPy algebraic computations that SymPy is capable of doing and get your results in properly formatted mathematics. Since SymPy knows already how to produce LaTeX versions of anything that it computes, once this is in place, it's simply a matter of telling SymPy, whenever you print a repr, give us the LaTeX form. Because once we have the LaTeX form, we can render it -- MathJax is really, really good.

One of the things that you often do when you're learning something is load external codes. So for example, we use matplotlib a lot. When people learn matplotlib, they often have to go to the gallery, because they don't quite know what they're going to do. They browse the gallery. They find an example that looks close to what they want. And then they try to execute it. The matplotlib gallery and the scikit-learn package have similar galleries. The scikit-image package has a similar gallery. These are galleries of examples with a script, the figure, and a link to the source code. Typically, you would download it, run it, et cetera.

So if you find an example and you find the source code link, we have a function called `%loadpy`, which can take a local path or a remote URL. You simply give it the URL. It fetches the script, loads it into the next cell. And then you execute it. And you have your example. So the transition from seeing an example online to executing it yourself is absolutely minimal. And you start changing it, tweaking it, and it immediately re-executes.

We provide an extension called SymPy Printing, which basically layers our representation protocol on top of SymPy's existing LaTeX machinery. It lets you produce this kind of environment, where any time that you compute anything with SymPy, the result is automatically rendered correctly, with proper symbolic expressions. And SymPy actually can work together with NumPy, so that you can combine numerical and symbolic work. You can combine SymPy's symbolic Taylor series expansions, for example, with NumPy and matplotlib to do numerical work. And all of this, once loaded, behaves very much like a classic computer algebra system, but through the web, with nice representations.

You can then grab these files and say, give me a print view. And the print view is simply a static HTML view of it, that your browser is then capable of either saving as a static HTML file, if you want to put it up on your website, or printing into a PDF. If you want to print it on paper or email it to a colleague who doesn't have the system, you can produce a static view of this. And we are busy building converters so that this exports into Sphinx and similar systems so that you have more control. The underlying format of these files is a JSON, a very well-structured JSON format that is very amenable both to version control and to machine manipulation. We've gone to great lengths to try to make that format easy to work with.

### Demo: Parallel Computing

And so finally, I'm going to show you the other part of the interface, which is the clusters. These are configurations that I have for different clusters. These are my different configuration profiles for IPython. Some of these could be configured to run on my systems at work. One of these could be configured to run on EC2 with all the necessary authentication machinery. And here, IPython lets me start or stop any cluster. So I can say, for example, stop my default cluster or start it again. And once this cluster is running, I can go and run code that executes things in parallel.

So this is a quick example. There is no time really to go through all the details. But the point is to show you that fairly complex things are relatively straightforward to do. In this case, what we do is we grab an object called the client, which is a proxy into the running cluster. And then we make a view. Views are basically views into these engines that have different execution semantics. You can have a direct view, which is effectively a multiplexer that sends code to be executed on all your engines, or a load-balanced view to which you submit tasks and which then schedules these tasks. There are fairly elaborate execution policies available.

What this demonstration does is, using the NetworkX graph library from Los Alamos National Lab, it builds a directed graph of dependencies, the kind of thing that a build system would compute. Make or any build system under the hood is computing a dependency graph. So in this case, we're building a random graph of dependencies, which is simply a bunch of tasks. And these are the dependencies between them. The point is to illustrate that you can schedule all of this bundle in one shot and tell the IPython cluster, do all these things and do them in the right order. These are their dependencies. I got these dependencies from somewhere else. In this case, we made them randomly. But these are my jobs. And they have this very complicated list of interconnected dependencies.

In this case, we're going to define the jobs to simply wait a random amount of time so that this completes. Because I am actually going to run it live. So I don't want it to take too much time. And then all we do is we create a dictionary of jobs. We schedule the results. And since we have the graph, all we have to do is sort them in topological order. When we actually do the code execution, we simply say, run this job after its dependencies, where its dependencies are the predecessors in the sorted graph. So with two lines of code, we're scheduling this with the correct topological order.

And now, if I say wait, it tells me the kernel is busy. I'm actually waiting for the completion of these jobs. But the first execution returned immediately. It returned immediately because it's asynchronous. I could keep working while my cluster is computing. Once I say I actually need the answers, I can wait on it. And then I get my data.

And we're going to validate that things ran correctly. This is basically a visual proof of the theorem. The directed graph, the thick part of the line is the arrowhead, and we're running time towards the right. So basically, as long as all the arrowheads lean to the right, everything ran in the right order. If we ever see an arrowhead pointed in any way towards the left, that would mean that something ran before its dependencies were met. And the fact that this is not a mathematical proof, but it's a visual illustration that the dependency order was correctly met. So in a couple of lines of code, you can schedule fairly elaborate things and have them run.

And as I said, the cluster continues to run. These are the IDs of the client. It means it has four engines, because that's exactly what we started here. Once we stop the cluster, then it won't be able to connect.

### Summary

So this shows you how, basically, our philosophy has been to integrate together around the tools in IPython something that lets you go from interactive, one person toying with an idea -- at the notebook, you're playing with some data, you're playing with a problem. In our case, which is scientific research, you start saying, well, this may have legs. I want to collaborate with a colleague. So you can share these tools. You can work with a colleague. You can scale to production, work in a cluster. You can put this on Amazon and scale this to large-scale production. And at some point, hopefully, you've got some results that you want to show to others. So you can produce HTML, PDF, or publishable results from this. And finally, use them to teach, because hopefully, you use those results to teach someone.

And we think that this is also a good tool for teaching. So it's sort of what we call the cradle-to-grave lifecycle of ideas, from exploring a new idea that may or may not pan out to completely presenting it in its finished form. And we're trying to build tools to make that possible in a fairly seamless way.

So please, we're right by the left, on the way into the exhibitor hall. We have a booth there where we can demo this. We'll be happy to talk to you. We will have a sprint. Some of us will stay during the sprint days. And we're going to meet with Olivier Grisel, who's one of the lead developers of the scikit-learn project, to try to basically make it very easy to put the beautiful tools that the machine learning scikit-learn project is developing, combined with the IPython parallel tools, to make it easier to run large-scale data analysis and machine learning projects in large parallel environments. So if some of you are interested in those topics, come on over to the sprints, or come and meet us.

## Q&A

**Q:** You spoke about collaborating with notebooks, and sending something to be shared with someone else. Can you talk a little bit more about how you would go about doing that?

**A:** The current implementation is fairly limited. Right now, what you can do is you can invite someone. Obviously, you can share these files on GitHub, or email them, whichever way you want. Or you can invite someone to basically share your session. What we don't have is any kind of real-time synchronization. So you enable -- we have a tutorial on how to enable password protection and SSL encryption on the traffic. And once you enable that, you can give that password to a colleague. Give them the URL where the notebook is running. And then they can connect, and they will see the same execution session. The only catch is that you have to save the file, and the other person has to hit Reload. So the way we do it, basically, is you're on the phone or on Skype. You save, the other person reloads, and you keep talking. And you basically have to hand off the typing to one another, because there's no visual indication of that. But it simply hasn't been done. Keep in mind, this notebook was released right before Christmas. So just a little over two months ago. We would love to collaborate with people who are good at web-type development to make that mechanism better.

**Q:** Can you talk about what is possible right now with Sphinx, and in the future, in terms of getting code to export?

**A:** We have a very, very simple restructured text exporter. Not even in the main code base -- I put it up just on a gist. The document format is extremely simple. The JSON is very easy to traverse. You don't even have to traverse it yourself. You just run an iterator that we provide. And so improving that exporter is very easy. What we would like to have is basically easily produce a Sphinx-compatible version of a notebook so that you can loop it into your document production cycle. The work to do that is literally a few hours worth. If nobody helps us with it, we'll just finish it one of these afternoons. But we've been kind of busy. This is like four conferences in three weeks. So we just haven't had the time to do it. You're welcome to swing by our booth, and I'll show you exactly what the code is. It's easy, fun code to write.

**Q:** How feasible is it to use IPython as a replacement shell, like if I just want to run it instead of Bash or Windows shell?

**A:** Ask Mark Wiebe, one of the core NumPy developers. Apparently he does. Because on Windows, the default terminal isn't very good, he uses the Qt console as his default shell on Windows. I personally don't, but I know people who do. Many people do. I don't, to be honest. And on Windows, especially, it's very, very popular. And more so now that we have the Qt console, which makes a really nice environment.

**Q:** Has there been any thought given to debugging in the interactive notebook, and thoughts about that?

**A:** So that's one thing that I failed to mention, that I failed to show. Right now, in the notebook, you can type `%qtconsole`, and it will open a console that is plugged into the current running kernel. So you can use that to use `%debug` and interactive debugging, or you can even connect from a terminal with a text console to a running kernel. I failed to show that. But we also plan on making it possible directly through the web widget. It just hasn't been done. It's one last ZeroMQ socket to wire, and a little widget needs to be written. So it's a little bit of work. It's not an afternoon, but it is in the cards, and it just needs to be done.

Thanks for your attention. Thank you.