---
title: "DuckDB Keynote Segment"
summary: "Keynote at Data + AI Summit 2023"
date: 2023-07-29T00:00:00
tags: ["keynote", "transcript"]
slug: data-ai-summit-keynote
word_count: 1629
source_file: transcripts/2023-07-29-data-ai-summit-keynote.md
content_type: transcript
event: "Data + AI Summit 2023"
video_url: "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AKix55rQEUU"
---

*This transcript was AI-generated using Whisper and may contain minor errors.*

## Transcript

Thank you, Brooke. Yes, hello, good morning. My name is Hannes Muehleisen and I'm here today to talk to you about DuckDB. But I would like to start with a small story. This is my actual car license plate from my first car 20 years ago. And what you can probably tell from this is that I may have been a database nerd back then already. In fact, I love these things so much that I went on to do research and this is where I met Mark Grasfeld who is here today. And we were starting to think about new ways of building database systems. And we were doing that in Amsterdam at the CWI, which probably you have not heard of, but it is the Dutch national research lab for mathematics and computer science. And it's the place where Python was invented by Guido van Rossum all those years ago. So it had a certain impact on the world.

But while we were there, we started feeling that there was something wrong with the world of data. And I should explain it's a movie from the 90s. In this movie, this character tells another character that he knew there was always something wrong with the world, but he couldn't quite put his finger on it. And we had the same feelings that there was something sort of off with how people were doing stuff with data and that we should probably do something about it.

And one thing we noticed after many years of thinking about that is that what was happening is that there were people using very big iron systems like Hadoop to solve fairly small data problems. Stuff that's a bit too big for Excel or Pandas or something like that. And by using some big iron for something small, like here this sledgehammer to crack a nut, that's an expression, you just get bad ergonomics. In German we have a saying to shoot at sparrows with cannons. And in fact, there was a development that has supported this where we now have data lake formats built on things like Parquet that actually have the ability of turning a huge data set, a very unwieldy thing into something much more manageable. And we can with formats like Parquet, we can actually very precisely fetch only data that is relevant to a specific query.

What also has happened is that we got a disconnect between storage and compute. And I know you know this and people have talked about this before, but I feel it's a difference between knowing that something is happening and appreciating all the possible consequences of it. One of the consequences that these things are disconnected is that we can scale down compute to the appropriate size that's sufficient for the problem. And you would be really, really, really surprised how small you can scale down data problems. In fact, the laptop in front of you is more powerful than you think. So if the data is small enough, there's no reason not to put it on your laptop.

Another thing that we've noticed while thinking about having the splinter in our minds about data systems was that the community was spending a lot of time thinking about the meat of the hamburger, the patty, apparently it's called. And this was great. You can write a lot of interesting research papers about things like join algorithms and things like that. But the problem is you're not looking at the whole hamburger, right? You're ignoring the end-to-end user experience. And that was such a problem that people had aversion towards data systems because they were hard to handle. And so we decided we were going to work on making an end-to-end good experience for data systems for once.

So the result of all that thinking and sort of like long 10-year process almost was that a whole new class of data systems was required. And the first instance of that class is DuckDB. DuckDB is an in-process analytical data management system. It does SQL. And I will tell you more about it in a moment. But first, the first question we always get is why is it called DuckDB? It is because I used to have a duck. His name was Wilbur. He is a very cute duck.

DuckDB is very flexible. It runs really anywhere. It can run from a Raspberry Pi to a huge server. It has a very small footprint, only 20 megabytes. And it has no dependencies. It's like just a C++ project and that's it. DuckDB is very feature-rich. We have a very large SQL dialect where you have all the features that you would expect from a modern analytical SQL engine. It has integrations with Python, a lot of other languages, Arrow integration, and can, for example, directly read Parquet files.

DuckDB is fast. We have a state-of-the-art vectorized so-called query processing engine. And that comes directly from the state-of-the-art research that we did at the research group in Amsterdam. For example, DuckDB can also automatically parallelize queries. So you give it a query and it will figure out how to use all your hardware resources. DuckDB is free. It's free as in free beer. It's MIT licensed. Do whatever you want. Build a company on top of it. It's really up to you.

But let me zoom into some things that make DuckDB different. DuckDB is not a client-server system. I know that is also something where it's a bit of a departure from what people are used to. All data systems under the sun are client-server. That has been unquestioned since 1984. But DuckDB is in process, meaning the database runs directly in application. And that means you can directly access data in the application. In fact, I'm going to show you a quick demo on why this is amazing. Here I have a Python script where I create a data frame with a billion rows. It's about eight gigabytes in memory. And now I can spin up a DuckDB instance in that same Python shell because it's in process. And I can run a query and it will only take 160 milliseconds or so to go through these billion rows and compute the average. That has to do with, yes, the database has a state-of-the-art engine. And it also can directly access the data in your memory of the Python process.

But let's zoom out a little bit. How does DuckDB fit in a typical architecture? We have our data lake, we have our analysis cluster, and we have the laptop with the analyst. Well, very often the first step is that we do ETL. We take the big, unwieldy data set and we transform it into a bit more manageable data in data lake formats of Parquet. But meanwhile, the analyst sits idle. And then we do the analysis project where we explore and we try to find out something about the data. And we use the cluster as well. And this works really well, but it creates contention with other jobs running on the cluster and it slows down analysis. With DuckDB, you can actually move the exploration and analysis on the very laptop that the user sits in front of. And it has one real advantage is there's no contention. You have your own laptop. It reduces latency and just generally reduces load on the cluster.

Let me show you another demo here. Here I'm now taking the famous New York taxi data set. It's about 90 gigabytes of data. It's in Parquet format. And it's about 1.7 billion rows across 50 columns. And I'm just using DuckDB in this shell here to set up the view with the trips. And now I can run, for example, a very basic query where I group the number of trips per cab type. And this query has to look at all this data in this huge data set. And it finishes in under three seconds on my two-year-old MacBook. So that is really something that you wouldn't have thought that you can run these huge data sets on a normal MacBook, right?

You can also have a much more complicated query. For example, in this query, we compute the number of trips per amount of passengers, the year in which they happen, and the distance. So this is a bit more complicated. And I'm not going to expect you to read the SQL query. But even this more complicated query will finish within under 10 seconds.

But how does DuckDB fit into the machine learning space? Well, we are not doing machine learning. We are database people. We are simple-minded. But as you probably know, the process of preparing data for analysis is one of the things that you spend most of your time on if you want to do any sort of ML problem. And DuckDB actually fits really great into that process, because I mentioned you can pull a Parquet file. You can do a lot of reshaping, wrangling, figuring out what features are required, creating new features, all that. You can do all that in DuckDB. And then we have integrations with systems like PyTorch or TensorFlow to directly ship the results of this. And the cool thing is that because DuckDB runs in process, we are already in the same environment that the ML library is also going to run in, which means the transfer is near instantaneous.

So now I hope I have given you some reason to check out DuckDB. Here are some pointers. But with that, I thank you for your attention.