---
title: "DuckCon #5 - Overview and Latest Developments"
summary: "DuckCon at DuckCon #5"
date: 2024-08-15T00:00:00
tags: ["duckcon", "transcript"]
slug: duckcon5
word_count: 5539
source_file: transcripts/2024-08-15-duckcon5.md
content_type: transcript
event: "DuckCon #5"
video_url: "https://youtu.be/xX6qnP2H5wk"
---

*This transcript was AI-generated using Whisper and may contain minor errors.*

## Transcript

Talk to the microphone, very good. In case you don't know me, my name is Hannes, Mark is over here. Many years ago we came up with this daft idea of making a new database and we're very happy that people sort of seem to care. Today we're gonna have a very exciting program for DuckCon here in the Egyptian cinema. So this is now, we're gonna start with Mark and me giving a bit of an overview, how we're thinking about things, how we're thinking about, you know, project progressing. Mark is gonna give you a preview on the next version of DuckDB. Then we're gonna have a talk from Francis about MotherDuck. We're gonna have a bunch of lightning talks by Jan and Andy. And then there's gonna be a second session where we have another talk about performant data apps by Robert. We're gonna have a talk about PGDuckDB by Joe. And then more lightning talks by Miguel, Brian, Richard, Edward and Unite. And afterwards, and this is obviously a part that's very important to us, is that we're gonna have drinks and snacks and grateful that MotherDuck has agreed to sponsor. And that's really also the thing that, you know, it's really nice to have this opportunity to talk to, you know, members of the team who are here. You can recognize the DuckDB team members with the yellow name tag. And just also among each other, I think we have really great experience from these sort of drinks and snacks sessions in the previous DuckCons where people can just, you know, tell each other about their favorite SQL query. I don't know. I don't know what you talk about. Okay, so let me get started with the DuckDB overview. This is a big screen. I'm a bit overwhelmed by this. So, okay. So we start, as is tradition, with a sort of state of the duck. We used to call a state of the duck. A bit of a, you know, observations of where we are with DuckDB. Talk a bit about how the adoption is going of DuckDB. And then, indeed, the next step is the part that Mark's gonna talk about, is where we're going, or we think we should be going with DuckDB, and what is planned for the next release 1.1.0. I still have to scream in my mind that you shouldn't start with zero anymore, because it was, you know, I don't know, six years of zero dot something. You know, it's one dot something. Okay, fine. All right. Yay, DuckDB! For those of you who don't know what DuckDB is, it's an in-process analytical data management system, and it's really the first custom build in-process analytical data management system, which is kind of an accident. We didn't really set out to make a new category, but there we are. And, yeah, it's free and open source. People really enjoy using it. But I wanted to briefly give you a bit of a, sort of, some of the thoughts behind, like, the motivation division, maybe, and I've tried to boil it down into two words. So, from just giving courses, talking to people, all this stuff, we have learned that people generally fear data, okay? Because data sets, they can be unruly, right? You're gonna have that wrong comma in line 400,000 or something like that. Data generally is feared, in my experience, when it stops fitting into Excel, once you can, you know, no longer scroll through it. And then the other problem is that the tools that people generally use, or have been using before, DuckDB, is the tools people generally are using to look at data, or to wrangle with data, they tended to be, I think, hostile is the right word, right? In the sense of, like, hard to use, hard to install, hard to set up, hard to make happy, hard to configure, hard to not give you a giant stack trace. But we really want to move this towards confidence, where we can basically create the tools that give people the confidence that they should not be intimidated by data sets, right? Data sets should just be harmless. It should be just like a, I don't know, a movie file or so. You just throw it in a VLC and it's gonna be fine, right? Nobody's afraid of movie files anymore. And we kind of want to get to the same point with, you know, this unwieldy collection of CSV files that you have. Yeah, so don't fear that CSV. I also wanted to sort of give an overview of what we kind of can see in terms of use cases for DuckDB, right? So there's three kind of main use cases that we can see at the moment. And the first one is kind of the one that we started with, I think, that we started thinking about making DuckDB for this interactive analysis use case, where there's an analyst sitting in front of a computer with a data set and just trying to ask some questions, right? And that kind of inspired a lot of the early design decisions for the in-process architecture, for the zero dependencies and so on and so forth. And it's a quite, you know, popular use case, right? Yesterday I was at the PositConf and talked about, you know, how our users can use DuckDB and Python users can use DuckDB. And that's, they're really happy because the tools aren't generally not as capable. But then we were really surprised because people started using DuckDB in the second main use case, where it's a component in sort of gigantic data pipelines. So some, you know, imagine some enterprise data use case and they have like 15 steps that the data set goes through and one of them is DuckDB. And that's really a novel thing because in the past you couldn't just stick a Spark cluster into a pipeline, right? That doesn't work. But with DuckDB, of course, you can just spin up a DuckDB instance and just run, do some minor transformation, like use a single relational operator. That's perfectly fine. And the third architect, the third sort of use case that we see, I called creative architectures. It's also really cool to see that. I haven't really, you know, we haven't really expected that. And that's kind of when people stick a data management systems into places where you know, nobody has tried before. So for example, on your mobile device, right? You can't just install Postgres on an iPhone. I think that's well-known. You can't run a Spark on an iPhone either. You can put DuckDB in a Lambda function. That's really exciting. You can run DuckDB in a browser. You can run DuckDB on a satellite in space. Like it's really, there's a ton of use cases that have really surprised us that are kind of breaking up the traditional data architecture like that, you know, from your university days, your two-tier architecture, client-server, blah, blah, blah. And that's kind of being broken up and it's really exciting for me to see that. Yeah, so that's kind of the first architectures are the use cases that we can see. Next, I want to talk a bit about adoption. And if you're the first time at DuckCon, you will not notice, but we're doing this kind of endless sort of recursion in the previous adoption slides. So you can almost, the first one you can just see some pixels, yet the screen is very big. But the last one is from January 2024 and it's totally crazy. I have to say, I have never expected anything like it. So we are now at just with Python, just with a Python client, we're above six million downloads per month, right? This is totally mind-blowing and if you look at the numbers from January this year, it was two million then. Okay, then DuckDB has this extension ecosystem where people can just install random extensions and that used to be five million per month. It's now 17 million per month. We are very happy that Cloudflare likes us still because, yeah, I think it's on the order of 200 terabytes a month at the moment. Our website, we accidentally made one of the more popular websites in our country with 600,000 unique web visitors per month. GitHub stars have been going up. LinkedIn followers is one of the more surprising numbers. We went from 6,000 to 23,000, which is, I think, also a Gabber's sort of work on promoting DuckDB on LinkedIn. And most importantly, the DB engines ranking, right, the only thing that really matters, went up to 10 points in the relation ranking, which is really exciting to see, right, for our sort of scrappy little software project. Pushed the wrong button, I'm sorry. This thing is the history, the development of GitHub stars. I'm happy to report that the verticalness has stopped a little bit because it was getting a bit too ridiculous, right. So it was just this three-month period, I think, around the DuckDB 1.0 release where it just went up straight and nobody believed us, right. They said, ah, you're buying stars. We are not, so we had to go. Speaking about 1.0, it's so exciting for us that we have finally managed to release DuckDB 1.0 and it's even more exciting that still nobody has found like a catastrophic bug in it. So when we were pushing out 1.0, it was like, you know, you have this anxiety, it was like, okay, five minutes later somebody will be like, oh by the way, the joints are broken or something like that, right. Didn't happen. It's still out there and it's still working really well. I'd like to hint at something. We put an easter egg in the 1.0 release and nobody has found it yet. So if you're, you know, if you want to look for it, then it's there. What also is happening that people are writing books about DuckDB. There's three now, which is also kind of wild to see that. I mean, we haven't been involved in writing the books. Other people write books about DuckDB. It's totally wild. And there's three now. I think more are in the works. And finally, after years of writing, we have a Wikipedia page. So that's, you know, they fought us tooth and nail, but we actually didn't do anything, right. Like the point of Wikipedia is that you're not allowed to create a Wikipedia page about your own stuff. So we haven't done it. Somebody else has done this. We don't know whom. But of course Wikipedia couldn't resist of putting the passive-aggressive marketer. So if you want to help, add some, what is that, need additional citations. Add some citations and we can maybe remove this. Okay. And from my side, lastly, I just wanted to point out that DuckDB is not VC funded. It's the company that employs the core contributors to the project, DuckDB Labs, does fund the whole show by offering commercial support contracts and consulting contracts. But the support contracts are basically privileged access to the DuckDB team and high priority issues and a sort of deadline on by which time we have to respond. So if you're interested in that kind of thing, you can talk to me. But I just wanted to put it out there because this is the way how we pay for everything. And with that, I want to hand over to Mark. Thank you. Thank you very much. It's great to see you all. It's very nice that you could all make it out here. It's very exciting to be here. I'm gonna give a bit of an overview about, well, where we're going with DuckDB, like some of the things we've been working on, some of the recent developments, some of our future outlook, and give a bit of a sneak peek of the next release, which is actually happening in three weeks, I think, in the September, early September. So one thing that I want to talk about that we're very excited about is extensions. So DuckDB has had extensions for a very long time, I think years at this point, and we have been building these extensions. And the initial motivation behind why we made extensions actually ties into one of the core reasons why we made DuckDB in the first place, which is that we wanted to keep the core system simple to use, simple to install, and simple to set up. And unfortunately, at some point, you're gonna need OpenSSL, and that is not any of those. But still, of course, there's a lot of useful functionality behind that, that is critical for using, well, internet connectivity, S3 connections, etc. That was the initial reason why we made extensions. And we have been building a lot of these ourselves. So I'm sure all of you have used them, either knowingly through the install and load interface, or accidentally, because actually a lot of our core functionality, like the parquet reader and the JSON reader, are also extensions. And over the over the past few years, as we've been working on the extensions, we have been basically, yeah, making it possible to extend anything, including like crazy things like extending the parser, you can run, add new functions, add new aggregations, add new file systems, you can do a lot of cool stuff. And there have been actually some people that had were crazy enough to make their own extensions, even before we were like, like thinking about that, which is one of the reasons why we thought, hey, maybe there's like, like something to it. But the problem was always that you had to run these as like unsigned, you had to allow unsigned extensions, you had to self host them. And we figured, well, we kind of want to like actually support this. Also, because we kind of realized that, well, like we can do a lot of stuff, obviously. But in the end, we can't do anything, everything and solve every single use case as, as like a, as a small company. And it's very nice, also to as a user feel that you're able to extend it and provide maybe like that last missing bit of information or like a functionality that you need. So we're very excited to announce community extensions. And so there's this, this website that you can visit, there's also a link on our official website. And community extensions are really cool, because you can build your own extension, you can basically just send us a PR to register the extension, and then people can use it. So there's this like a very simple syntax that's described here, where you basically say install the extension from community. So that's like the repository, and then you can load it and you can use your new functionality. And there's already a bunch of them. So one of the cool ones is the h3 extension that you can already install and use today. And that allows you to use this h3 format indexing structures. So that's really cool. And we're well, obviously hoping that more and more people build these extensions to really like further the things that you can do with DuckDB. So if you are, if you're interested in this, you can go to the extension templates repository, which is a template that has been created by by one of our engineers by some. And it's quite cool, you can just create a new repository based on this template, start writing up some, I don't know, some functions, some aggregations, something simple. After that, you can send a PR to us into the community extensions repository that has like one of these descriptor files. So this is an example of the h3 extension that I said before. And it's like, yeah, quite simple, you just link to where the code is hosted, GitHub revision and some documentation, and it'll end up on our website and installable. And we'll do all the all the GitHub CI, we'll do all these sort of like building distribution for all the different platforms for you. And one of the cool things we are also currently working on, so currently, all these extensions are mostly written in the C++, using C++, which is the same language that DuckDB itself is written in. But we're doing a push towards a C, a stable C API that allows you to do many of the same things you can do in C++. And what's kind of cool about that, because C is like this kind of foundational language for computer programs, is that allows you to then build extensions in other languages using that API as well. And one of the first languages we're targeting for that is Rust. So very soon you'll be able to write your extensions within Rust as well, submit them and have them distributed using the community extensions framework. So we're very excited about that. Another thing I want to briefly mention that we're working on is PGDuckDB. So this is a project we've been working on together with Hydra and MotherDuck, and Joe from Hydra will give a presentation about this later. And it's kind of cool. It allows you to run DuckDB within Pulsegres. So we've had the Pulsegres scanner for a while that allows you to connect your DuckDB instance to Pulsegres, pull the data from your Pulsegres instance to DuckDB. This is kind of neat because it pushes DuckDB into your Pulsegres instance, allowing you to do, well, a lot of cool stuff you can do with DuckDB right inside your Pulsegres instance, and mixing and matching it with the stuff you can do in Pulsegres. So yeah, there will be another presentation on that in a bit. Then I want to talk a bit about the next DuckDB release. It's called the Etoni, after the duck the Eton's pintail, if I'm pronouncing that right. It's a duck that's native to a bunch of islands in the Indian Ocean. It's a very pretty duck, as you can see. A very nice duck. This will be released in a few weeks in September. There's a lot of features here, a lot of performance improvements, a lot of bug fixes, but I kind of want to go over some quick highlights in the presentation. One of the things that we have always been focusing on is friendly SQL. So making it easy to do cool stuff, or nice analytics in SQL. One of the things that will be included in this release is the histogram function. This function is quite neat, because it allows you to very quickly get, well, it's kind of in the name, a histogram of a column from within the table. It's very easy to use. You just point it at, well, it could be a bunch of parquet files, could be a table, and it gives you this nice little overview of the data distribution from within your column. You can use that for any type, any table, it all works kind of automatically. I think that's pretty neat. One thing that's actually quite simple, but I think is actually kind of an enabler for a lot of complex, like dynamic SQL, is the query and query table functions. So these functions, conceptually, are quite simple. They turn a string, so like a VARCHAR, into either a table scan or into a query. So it's a bit like eval for databases, but not as, not actually quite so dangerous. And what's nice about this is these functions, they allow you to write, for example, like macros or functions that execute dynamically over different tables. And the histogram function that I just showed is actually based on this functionality. So here, for example, you can see here I'm creating a macro that gives me the top end, so the top three values of each column in that table. And you can kind of see like how dynamic you can make these kind of macros now. So the table name is an input here, right? And that gets pushed into this query table thing that turns this string into an identifier. Then you can see I'm using the columns expression that automatically expands to all of the columns in the table. And the three I've hard-coded here could also be a parameter. And you can see that gives them the top three of all of the columns in the table, right? So you can do a lot of like cool dynamic SQL with these kind of things. And so something that actually comes back a bit to the community extensions. So one of the ideas we've had as well is to allow you to write community extensions with only SQL. And by making it possible to write these kind of functions within that essentially only use SQL, you can do quite a lot of stuff with that. A bit in the same vein, this really is going to include SQL level variables. And that allows you to basically set variables from, for example, you can set them to constants, of course, to literals. But you can also read these variables from tables, from files, or anything else, right? You can run a query to set these variables. And that's conceptually quite simple, but it's quite cool because this allows you to do something that was previously not really possible, which is do dynamic reading of files. So for example, what I can do now with this is I can get my list of CSV files or what have you from another table, from another query, from a file. And then I can push that into the read CSV function. And I can basically just get a list of files to read from a table, from another file, from a text file that I have on my system. So that's one of those other things that you can do even more with SQL now. Similarly, on the dynamic SQL front, we've had the column syntax for a while that allows you to do dynamic stuff over a bunch of columns in a table. So you can use like a regular expression, a lambda function to select which columns you want to operate on. In this release, we're going to get the ability to also unpack those columns, which is kind of like a Python-esque way of saying you can get all the columns that you list here, and you can unpack them so they become function arguments to the same function instead of expanding to multiple function calls. So for example, here you can see I'm using the columns function to select these two columns from this data set, the arrival delay and arrival delay minutes. And then here I'm unpacking them into this greatest function, which then gives me the greatest of these two numbers. So that allows even more dynamic SQL. There's also a lot of cool stuff we've been doing on the performance front. So one of the things I want to highlight is the dynamic pushdown of filters from joins. So that's kind of a mouthful maybe, if you're not too familiar with all those things. But essentially what it means is that if you're doing a join or like one of the selections from a subquery, like an in-clause, anything like that, which gets translated into a join, what we can do now is we can basically in the build phase of the hash join, we can scan what rows have come in there and dynamically generate filters that then get pushed back into the scan on the other end, in the probe ends. And that allows for some great speedups in some of these workloads, especially if you have like parquet files or duct to be files that are like partitioned, that have zone maps, because then we can skip reading most of the data. So if you have like a let's say a high partitions parquet file or even a normal parquet file, just a single parquet file with the row groups, we can skip reading many of the rows in some of these cases, which can offer great speedups. Yeah, the CSV reader, it's always this never-ending thing. The variety of CSV files continues to amaze. But yeah, we've been making even more improvements to the CSV reader. Apera has been very hard at work at that. And in particular, we have now a lot of improvements towards reading many small CSV files. So the Apera CSV reader has previously been optimized primarily for individual like larger files. And this release also features a bunch of improvements for reading many small files and like reduced memory, having to use a lot less memory. So that's quite neat, if you have a lot of CSV files, which sorry if you do. And another kind of cool feature that I want to talk about is automatic materialization of CTE. So that's kind of a mouthful. It's a feature that Lawrence has worked on, one of our engineers. And the idea is that if you have a CTE, essentially like a view, right, that you reuse at multiple locations inside your query. Previously, we would like recompute this, unless you explicitly chose to materialize it. So you would have to like put the materialized keyword there, then it would be materialized, and then it would avoid recomputing it. And it's actually like it's, it sounds kind of easy, this optimization, but it's quite gnarly, because in many cases, you actually don't want to materialize it. So Postgres for a long time always materialized these, and then lost a lot of performance in many cases, because if you don't materialize it, you can push down into the query, and you can often execute these things much faster. So what we're doing, what we're doing now is we're actually looking at the query plan, and figuring out, is this worthwhile to materialize? Can we push in any filters? Can we do? And if not, if we can't make use of these additional optimization by not materializing, and it's essentially always fast to materialize, then we will materialize. So that's quite neat. That's another thing that now, you used to have to do manually, and now you can do automatically. Finally, I want to talk about parallel streaming queries. So that's something that is quite, of course, DuckDB is a streaming engine. That's one of the things that make it very powerful, because the streaming nature allows it to work without having to load all the data in memory. It also supports streaming directly into your application as a user. But previously, this has always been a single-threaded endeavor. And if you wanted to stream into your application, you'd essentially have to do this in a single-threaded manner. So that could mean that a lot of performance would be lost. So starting with this release, this will also be able to be done in parallel. And the way that works is that there's essentially like there's a buffer at the roots that is filled up in parallel, up to a certain amount, like let's say a few megabytes, nothing too large, because of course, the whole point of the streaming engine or like one of the main purposes is to reduce memory pressure, but we can fill up a few megabytes using our cores. It's very fast. And then your application can pull data from that buffer. And then as it empties, the threads will be launched again and will go in parallel again. So that's very cool as well. For the spatial people, this release also includes support for Geo Parquet, which is quite cool. It's been worked on by Mux, our resident spatial expert. And something that I think I myself am very excited about, next release, not next release, very soon, it's not actually tied to the release cycle, we're going to have dark mode on the documentation. So long awaited, long awaited. So yeah, thanks to Gabor and the documentation people for this, it's going to be very nice. We're also working on a bunch of new platforms. So next release, we'll have Windows Arm support, Android and Pyodide, which is quite cool, allows you to run Python in the browser. And yeah, a bit of a like a forelook into the next years in DuckDB. So a lot of these we're already working on. A lot of these are just ideas we have. So the extension ecosystem, building that up and getting that into a state where it's very easy to build extensions also in different languages is something that we are really focusing on, and we think can really push the system forward. We're also working hard on the Lakehouse data format. So we've had support for Iceberg for a while, and Delta, working on adding more, adding right support to those and getting those like in a very nice shape. We're always working on optimizer improvements, in particular, partitioning and sorting awareness and stuff where we've been making gradual improvements on and the cardinality estimation and something we have been recently working on that we may actually have a research paper about coming out about soon as well as the parser extensibility. So there's some neat stuff that you can already do in DuckDB with extensions by extending the parser. I want to make that even easier and even nicer. All right, so those are my slides. And I think we can do a bit of a Q&A, Gabor. Thank you. Thank you all for listening. Cool. Hey, thank you for coming here and the talk. A quick question for extension. If we write extension, how about the pushdown optimization, like filtering pushdown, aggregation pushdown, and maybe some other pushdowns in the extension? So you can do all of those, but you're, in some sense, partially responsible for those. So there are already extensions that have this pushdown, like, for example, the Parquet extension, right? Like it pushes filters into Parquet files. The PulseQuest extension can push filters into the PulseQuest query that's running on the back end. So all of those things are possible. They are like opt-in. So one of the things that we want to, of course, enable is that it's easy to write those extensions. So by default, the system will do those things, but probably not in the most efficient way because it doesn't have the knowledge of your back ends, your formats, or something it's interacting with. But it's definitely possible to use all of those features and extensions as well. All right. Any more questions? Yeah. Hello. I like geospatial things. So it was nice to see the geoparquet stuff. Can you kind of describe the difference between the, like, GDAL geospatial extension and how geoparquet is coming in differently there? That's a great question. I'm maybe not the right person to answer that, but I guess I can give it a shot. So the geoparquet, I think, is, it's really like a storage format that is like, allows you to very efficiently store and query these spatial data sets in a portable manner, right? So, like, I think one of the reasons geoparquet is exciting is kind of similar to the reason why parquet itself is exciting, right? It allows you to share those formats across different libraries, across different back ends. GDAL and such, that's, those are more like the functionality that's, that is there. I think, yeah. All right. One more question. Up front. Oh, yeah. So that you had the 1.0 release now. Yes. Has that changed the focus on what you're going to work on in the future? Or has that remained the same? Well, one of the big focuses with the 1.0 release was stability. And I think that has been going forward also still a very big focus. I think also a lot of our developments have kind of shifted towards more and more towards extensions and less and less towards the actual core. We're still doing a lot of work on the core. There's still a lot of work that has to be done there, that will be done there. But we're also doing more and more developments on the, on like the edges, on the extensions, new functionality. And that's one of the reasons why we like extension in the first place, because we can work on things like the spatial extension, because some people really like spatial, but maybe not everyone needs those features, right? So that you can avoid all of the bloats within the actual core system and have it only available for the people that need it. Wow. Thank you. Thank you.