---
title: "DuckDB and the Future of Data Engineering"
summary: "Podcast at The Data Engineering Show"
date: 2025-03-19T00:00:00
tags: ["podcast", "transcript"]
slug: data-engineering-show-ai
word_count: 6602
source_file: transcripts/2025-03-19-data-engineering-show-ai.md
content_type: transcript
event: "The Data Engineering Show"
video_url: "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AveV-29uXRA"
---

*This transcript was AI-generated using Whisper and may contain minor errors.*

## Transcript

The Data Engineering Show is brought to you by Firebolt, the cloud data warehouse for AI apps and low-latency analytics. Get your free credits and start your trial at firebolt.io. Hi, everyone, and welcome back to the Data Engineering Show. Today, we're super happy to have Hannes on. Hannes is co-creator of DuckDB and now CEO of DuckDB Labs. Welcome to the show, Hannes, and also a professor in the Netherlands, of course. Yes, many hats. Well, thanks a lot for having me. It's a pleasure to see you guys and chat about databases. It's my favorite topic. Good. Ours as well. Benjamin, I have to give you credits for pronouncing Hannes correctly. This is one of the benefits of talking to another German, obviously. Good. How often is your last name pronounced correctly? That also seems non-trivial. Never. I should have just renamed myself to Hans Müller or whatever when I left the country, but such are the things that you learn afterwards. Nice. Look, I think most of our listeners will have heard of DuckDB, right? You guys are everywhere. I think the mindshare you have is amazing. Do you still, for all the listeners who haven't heard, want to give a 30-second rundown of what DuckDB is all about? Yes, happy to. So, DuckDB is a universal data wrangling tool. That's what we're saying now. That's the first layer. Then you can unpack that a bit and say, okay, it's a relational data management system that speaks SQL that is specifically designed to be doing well on analytical use cases like large aggregations, like joins, these kind of things. And I think DuckDB is special in, obviously, there's many systems like it, but DuckDB is special in that we are trying to really focus on ease of deployment, kind of universal applicability that is possible to run DuckDB on a phone, a browser, a space satellite, you name it. Are you running on space satellites? As far as we know, yes. We have been talking to various spacey people. About this, but obviously, I mean, we don't have proof of it. We don't have telemetry. I also should mention that DuckDB is free and open source under the MIT license. And the company that I had, DuckDB Labs, is very unsuccessful in company terms. That's not true. It's doing okay, but the project is doing extremely well. So, it's downloaded like 10 million times each month. So, yeah, quite happy. When would I use DuckDB versus SQLite, for example, which is also in process, kind of standalone, most people will know? I mean, SQLite is amazing. They are the world's most widely deployed database system for a reason. Also in space. I think it's confirmed that they are in space. Very much. Very much. Far ahead of you, Hannes. Far ahead. Oh, okay. This is the threshold. This is the threshold. Yeah. Aviation, apparently, too. They have a big contract with Boeing, I'm told. Nice. The SQLite is an amazing system, but it is not meant for analytical queries, right? It's built for a transactional use case where you pull a single row, you update a single row, you append some rows. It's really not meant to run an aggregation on a billion rows. It can't. It's not paralyzed. It has a weird type system that doesn't allow it to have efficient storage. Everything lives in a giant B-tree with rows in it. So there's just some limitations on what it can do. However, this is not a criticism of SQLite. It's just a different use case. And so we actually call ourselves sometimes the SQLite for analytics because it's kind of explained the design or the original sort of, yeah, the design goal of that to be very well. They haven't changed their marketing in the DuckDB lab since the beginning. Hey, it works. Consistency. Exactly. Like some things are. But, you know, since we got Hannes here, sometimes it feels like you drive a very small vehicle, right? Like you have a few seats and you're looking at people sitting there on those seats and everyone there is a giant. And tell us a bit about your history, right? Like, where are you coming from and how everything came to be? I remember that I saw your project for the first time pre-COVID in Amsterdam, SIGMOD. Professor Thomas Newman is bashing the database, showing you how slow it is, running heavy on some heavy predicate. And you guys are kind of defending it proudly. And there weren't like those millions of millions of downloads and people wouldn't kind of think about DuckDB. Nobody knows SQLite actually anymore, even though it's heavily used. But everyone knows DuckDB. I love SQLite, of course. But tell us kind of how it came to be. Yeah, I'm happy to. So I'm originally from Germany. I grew up in Stuttgart. At some point, I moved to the Netherlands through a postdoc at the Citibrew AI Database Architectures Group, which is a well-known research group in databases. They were quite early with columnar storage. I mean, LDAT, you of course know MonetaDB well. So that's the system that came out of that group. And I was there as a postdoc and I'm still there officially, but later on as a senior researcher. And within that research group, we were, you know, Mark Glasfeld, who is not here today, but he's, of course, the second sort of creator of DuckDB. We started kind of, you know, thinking about various sort of details of databases, like, oh, how do we do like UDFs better? How do we deal with client server better? And that kind of spiraled. And at some point we thought, hang on, in order to get some of the things we thought were important really right, we need to actually start from scratch, which is never a good idea in databases, right? It's like one of those things people tell you to absolutely never do, which would cost, you know, a hundred million dollars and take 10 years. Like there's variations on those numbers, but you have heard those. Obviously, sometimes I leave without looking. It's one of the qualities maybe. So I thought, ah, these old people, what do they know? Mark is absolutely brilliant. We can do this in two years. Obviously, it turned out that they might have been right. But so we started DuckDB in officially, I think the first came within 2018 as a sort of new in-process analytical system. It was the first one. There was, I think there's still no other one. And that sort of, yeah, we started hacking around on it. A year later, indeed, LDAT was SIGMOD 2019, which we organized. And I can also tell everybody to never organize SIGMOD or VLDB if you're listening, just don't. I think in our audience, there's a very limited number of people who would ever organize SIGMOD or VLDB. Let's extend this to any conference. But yeah, so we organized the SIGMOD in Amsterdam that year. So we decided, hey, that's a great moment to open source DuckDB. And we had a demo at SIGMOD. And we might have snuck some stickers into sponsorship bags without paying for it. But okay. You paid with your blood, organizing the conference, like blood, sweat and tears. Yeah, this is true. This is very true. Like this was hell. But yeah, and indeed, LDAT, we had a demo that indeed, a well known professor from Munich kind of threw queries at us like more or less like randomly. And I don't think yeah, like try this one, try this one. And obviously, yeah, I think in a very positive spirit. I mean, we have, I think it's generally true that there is a really good sort of team spirit in this space, right? Like, we speak to the Munich team, we speak to other teams in Amsterdam, we speak to people in the US, it's, I feel like within this database engine sort of space, there is, you know, in the end, we all working on the same problems. And there's like 100 of us on the planet. So you can't. So if you want to talk to anyone about your stuff, you kind of have to be friends with the other teams. There's no point of like manufacturing diversion or whatever. It's not a diversion division. Anyways, yeah, so that's that was that we open sourced in 2019. Like think about it, you would have you would have a world where all the world's fastest databases are done from Munich or from Germany, for example, like how terrible that word will look like, right? Yeah, I mean, I have I have a high respect for the for the team in Munich. They are they are they are brilliant. And we have of course, of course, in lots of sort of aspects of DuckDB, we've we've sort of implemented things that was described in papers like, you know, the famously the subquery unfolding that that it was just a paper at BTV by Thomas Neumann, by the way, like kind of like 10 years, 10 years later, how to make it even smarter. Yeah. So yeah, like the old version. And kind of exactly. Yeah. Yeah. Mark has complained that he now needs to read this one as well. But it's in a in a in a in a sort of positive. Of course. So so yeah, so DuckDB was was open sourced. And then it started like it's it's slow sort of growth. And there have been some interesting inflection points. And interestingly, I think the stupid website, the stupid orange website has helped quite a lot. I mean, Hacker News, of course, which has its set of issues, I want to say that even shadow banners at some point, which was really ridiculous. But it did it did really work in sort of driving the first sort of as larger groups of people towards DuckDB. And since then, yeah, it's it's it's been it's been a pretty enormous the the amount of adoption that DuckDB gets, as I mentioned, you know, from things from sex satellites in space to people putting it in, you know, batteries. And no, there's there's only and we only know, like, you know, 1% of use cases, because most people just use DuckDB and we never hear of them again, right? Like it's, we have a very interesting sort of feedback loop, which is issues, right? And people are buying support or something like that, right? But it's not really like we, we don't have like you guys always at over at Firebolt, I think you have a very good idea what your customers up to. We don't have that. So who knows? Use and throw, use us and throw us, you know, like, just you need to run a SQL, just run it. Easy. Yeah, yeah. And, and I think it's also special in DuckDB is that this idea that that you can use it as a component, that's something we actually didn't see coming really in the beginning, because we made DuckDB as this kind of in process thing that works well in like a data science use case where you live in a Python shell or an R shell, and you want to do some, some analysis of data. And you know, that worked really well, the in-process architecture really works because of the in-memory sort of data sharing that you can do. But what we really underestimated in the beginning was that if you have like a, you know, a data pipeline of some sort running in some company, then you can just push the DuckDB in there and then have it done, do like one operator, like do a sort, do a one single aggregation on, you know, a couple of gigabytes of data. And people use it on a CPU, fuse it. You know what the next step is? No. And I'm telling you this exactly, you know what it is? Instead of just shaking so many hands, running in so many places, just burn it on the silicon, just go AWS, silicon, Graviton powered DuckDB inside. I think it's like, if someone is hearing us. I'm screaming into the void, wanting a DuckDB instruction on the ground. It's all assembly. And then you can do DuckDB and just put a SQL query. The craziest thing is Hannes was so, they were so obsessed that early on to refuse to shake hands, to refuse to get, just a second, just a second, to refuse to get outside quote into the project. And the philosophy was that later on, we don't need to understand each and every use. We don't, we can't, we can't understand each and every use case. We want to just run purely everywhere in its simplest form. And I think that connects to what you said, run a sort, run a compute something, what, you know, fuse on the CPU. I think that was the big, big, big surprise that nobody saw. And that's true innovation. You also became a professor along the way. You're interviewing like crazy. What about your boat? How is your boat doing? Are you still working on your boat? Yes, I am. So for people who don't know, I, we, me and my family, we live on, we live on a ship in Amsterdam and it being a ship and it being over a hundred years old, it doesn't need constant maintenance. But I do, I do enjoy that if I have time to, to basically hit something with a hammer every now and then, because I'm after 25 years in IT, I'm, I'm kind of, I'm kind of done with, you know, with, with sitting in front of a computer 24 seven. So, so hitting something with a hammer every now and then is, is really, I can recommend it's liberating. But what you mentioned with hardware is actually, I mean, we have had this discussion at some point, but we actually don't believe in custom hardware instructions at DuckDB. So that's, I mean, time and again, we've tried to, you know, to, to use anything sort of specialized in terms of hardware, like crazy instructions on Intel, crazy instructions on ARM, crazy instructions on God knows where, and it has like really never been worth it from sort of an end to end perspective. And so, which is super interesting because it's like the opposite philosophy of what the Clickhouse team is doing. We're like hyper-tuning in many cases, their algorithms to, to specific like kind of hardware architectures. Come on, don't overdo it. Don't overdo it. You know, there is a PR here, PR there. Evolution, open source evolution. I think, I think it's interesting. I mean, obviously the Clickhouse team is also here in Amsterdam, so we have to, you know, we have, we, we, we can, we can meet on neutral territory. It's interesting. I think Clickhouse and other tools that are sort of pivoting more towards a SaaS sort of offering as a, as a project, as a company, they have a much bigger interest, of course, in, in hype, in tuning for specific architectures, because they are running on a specific architecture, like maybe other people, but that, that has, that is a different incentive from us where we say, hey, we really never, ever want to get like killed by illegal instruction or anything like that would have, which, which even happened to NumPy a couple of months ago, right? Like the, where you think NumPy, right, of all things managed to have, like managed to screw up their AVX integration in such a way that it would just not start on like a slightly older CPU, where you think that's exactly what you can't do if you're, if you're, if you're going for SQLite levels of adoption. And that's essentially what we're trying to go for is this, is this wider adoption that's like, I mean, people run DuckDB on like IBM mainframes and that works, right? Because we don't have anything specific built in. People run it on, people even manage to, to run it on, on like some Chinese homegrown CPUs that are now becoming more popular because of some export restrictions around CPUs, which is totally wild, right? And they're, and they are, for some reason, they have a different NDNS and it's wild, but hey, it works. Yeah. It's, it's, and that's a different goal from, from running a SAS, right? It's entirely different sort of targets. It's more like, it's more similar to making like Linux where, you know, who knows what you, what somebody glued together in their shed and it should still run. Yeah. That's exactly the, that's exactly the approach that we have. Yeah. Which is like, and I think it's always super impressive in terms of just how focused you are on this. So we're, for example, like rebuilding our parquet reader right now. And we obviously looked at what kind of people are doing and then we saw, Hey, the DuckDB team built their own parquet reader from scratch, which is like an insane under, so, okay. Hannes even built it from scratch, which is like a crazy undertaking. And all of us were like super impressed kind of here in the office saying, wow, like crazy what lengths you guys are going to, to kind of keep the binary small, keep it portable, kind of keep it lightweight. I mean, can you tell you the story of the parquet reader if you want? I'd love to hear the story of the parquet reader. Showing the PR when they try to convince you. I know the PR. I know the PR. Okay. So there's some, there's the parquet, there's some interesting stories around that. So obviously we would have preferred not to build our own parquet reader. Okay. Like that would have been great because it's not like I like parquet specifically as a format, as a philosophy. I mean, okay. I like the concept. I don't like the design choices. Ask me for parquet rents. You don't like the logo. You don't like the logo. The logo. I don't, I don't care so much. I mean, obviously as a, as a son of an architect, I'm a big sort of parquet floor, floor snub. So that that's okay. So we would have loved to, to not build our own, but the problem was there was simply no parquet reader as a component that was available. So there was at the time, there was a parquet reader in C++ in Impala, but that was kind of deeply, deeply integrated into the Impala gigantic thing that also talk, you know, yeah, I mean, but this is generally how it happens. Right. And then there was a parquet CPP, which would have been a great candidate only that half a year before the creator, Uwe Korn from Germany, actually, he donated this reader to the Arrow project and managed to Arrowfy it to the degree that you had to take the entire Arrow dependency in order to use the parquet reader, which we were unwilling to do because Arrow CPP has, in my opinion, grown to like beyond out of control in terms of sort of what, you know, it should be, but that's my personal opinion. And, and so, so, and then there was, that was kind of it in terms of competence C++ read, C++ parquet readers. And, and yeah, so, so it was sort of very, like, it's, it's like, it was a very annoyed sort of face that I started to implement this. And I mean, India, but at the same time, I do love encodings. Like, like how, how you put a table on into bits is one of my favorite questions. Like, it's like this dimensionality reduction, right? You go from two dimensions to one dimension. How do you do this? Well, who knows? Right. It's, it's, it depends. That's, I think that's the good, that's the management summary. It depends. And then parquet is doing one particular thing. It's fairly compact encoding. And then, yeah, that's so, so that's how we ended up with one, obviously at this point, many other people have worked on it, recently marked it a big refactor. I'm still sometimes patching it, but it is, it is our own. I think, oh yeah, I have one more thing about the parquet reader. And it actually turns out in order to make a competent parquet reader, you do need query execution. There's just no way around it. Because like, the problem is, if you want to do things like expressions for filter pushdown, for example, doing that without a database engine is extremely ugly because you need to somehow encode what the expressions are, what the semantics are. You have to still execute a filter. You still have to execute. If you want to do complex impressions, you'd have to have complex expression execution. You kind of still want some concept of parallelism and this kind of balloons out of control. And so a parquet reader that's competent has kind of no choice, but to become a database engine. It's kind of an interesting sort of development. History is full with file formats that try to overtake the predicate pushdown from query engines. This is like the oldest battle in database history. And so for those, for the listeners who don't understand, this is always about kind of how to process data right. There is the right way, the one that's always been right. And then there is adventures and stuff that people try. So unless it's in a database, it shouldn't be there. And we are strong believers in that as well. And maybe to that quick question for you, as you're also kind of channeling many students and researchers through your project, right? So for those who don't know that project is evolving, not just because two people are committing, but really kind of cutting edge of database research is flowing into that project in various ways. How do you see AI blending into databases, right? Putting the commercialization aside, like let's put AI features aside. That's less interesting. But from an open source perspective. Yeah, I have to admit something. I see AI on the same level of idiocy as Bitcoin personally. Wow, that's a fun take. Slow motion, slow motion. I mean, you know, similar to Bitcoin having applications in stealing other people's money, AI has applications in, you know, rendering funny pictures for my slides. Great. But these are kind of on the same level of usefulness, in my opinion. So I think it's absolutely has no place in a database engine, to be quite honest with you. Because it is, okay, so question is, what could you possibly use AI for? I think the first thing that people tried was query optimization. That suffered from crazy overfitting and non-transferability. They claim they fixed this now, I don't believe. Unfixed, listen, okay? All of the researchers that have built a career on query optimization, they're out of a job. Okay? No, they're not out of a job. I'm happy that they have jobs. I'm just like saying, I don't think it's a great idea. And I mean, that's just my opinion. You sit with a bot, you let the kid, you take a kid, okay? And you let the kid, the six-year-old, you know, talk to the bot and ask the bot to move database knobs. And it works. After five minutes, which is a long time, I know, it doesn't fit any use case. Okay. Still five minutes of hard work by a kid. Queries optimized. Wonderful. So that I don't see. Then what else are we going to use this for? We have learned indexing. Now that's even worse idea, in my opinion. That's just approximating like some, it's just a worse version of a clustered index B-tree hash table. I don't care, but that's the reference, not having an index, right? And so I think that's the general issue with the papers that I've seen so far in that space is that they never compare with a component baseline, right? That's never going to be the state of the art. How do you think it's changing though, like the way people like interact with databases, right? I think this is maybe like the more interesting question, but also Eldad kind of was curious about. Okay. That is fair. And I think there is something to be said about assisting users in writing queries, in sort of getting a summarization description of your schema, your table, your data, who knows. That, however, is not something that we as builders of like a core engine are really doing. Like I know there's, for example, a team at MotherDoc that is working on text to SQL and assistance with fixing SQL queries. I'm sure you have something similar. I think that's fair. That's kind of one of the things that I think like AI is okay at these kind of assistance tasks. Again, it's not really something that touches my world because by the time the AI is done, I get a query and I've executed and we're happy with it. So, or by the time, you know, the assistant may be pulling schema information from us, but okay, great. So, we expose schema information and then do whatever you want with it. I think that's, yeah. And so, I don't really see core engines to benefit. I think another interesting question is do software developers, for example, our software developers or your software developers benefit from AI support? And I have personally noticed that my beloved Sea Lion, I don't know what you're using Sea Lion as well, but we use Sea Lion, has started to be more, let's say, exuberant about the kind of suggestions that it makes. And that's AI, right? And I think that's nice. There are some things that are like, hey, it's like Clippy. It looks like you're trying to write a for loop. Click here to write a for loop. And I'm like, great Clippy. Thank you very much. For those people who remember Clippy, I'm sorry. I just dated myself to, you know, to early 80s. It works now. It works. Clippy works. Yeah, exactly. Clippy works better now. But the thing is, if you're writing a parallel sort implementation, is an assistant going to help you? I have my serious doubts about that, right? I don't think it is. So, yes, if you're trying to make a Python script to read something from a REST API, sure, I can see that. Parallel sort? I don't think so. New type? New database type? I don't think so. Please add a new database type to .db. Please file a PR. Will I be able to do it this year? Will you review Eldad's PR when he files a PR for you tomorrow, Hans? Because it's Eldad, I will happily review it. But maybe you shouldn't. This is shit. No, no, no. This is, by the way, something we do absolutely strive to be friendly to people on our issues and pull requests and discuss. This is something that I think is something that is absolutely generally a good idea to sort of improve the style of interaction between people in the database world, because when I started in database, it was quite angry. And I didn't understand why. And so we've been, actually, it's one of our principles to be positive. But here's the thing. If you think about .db and kind of trying to push .db or get .db at as many use cases as you can think about, AI is just a force multiplier. It's accelerating it. Like, SQL is hard. And SQL and databases are hard to understand by most people. And there's this huge ecosystem that is just trying to remove that friction, failing miserably. So what you're saying, this is where I stop. This is where I stand, that SQL gate, right? Talk SQL to me. Talk SQL to me, baby. Yeah. Yeah. Now, I think this is fair. And I think this is also, you wouldn't suggest that the Linux kernel should be taking system calls in natural language. There are just some, that does not make any sense. I mean, I'm sure somebody suggested it, but that doesn't make sense there. There's components and components like databases, in my opinion, are sufficiently low on the stack that a defined interface is worth a lot. And again, you can argue SQL is not a defined interface because the standard is a mess and blah, blah, blah. But let's say from within one system, there is a defined sort of behavior going on there. And we also have something we call the relational API, which allows you to programmatically build a query. So you can kind of say, I want to join, and I want to filter, and I want like an aggregation, and I want to sort. I want the single project, the single add-on, the single add-on project. Let's do, what's the name of that relational object mapping thingy? You remember? Hibernate? No. Exactly. You remember that? And before we've had something else. It never works. It never works. No, no, no. This is not, this is not ORM. This is, this is just a way of expressing, if you have a program that wants to write a query, it's just simplifying the task as a programmer to not have to concatenate strings in order to do that. It's more like, I can have an object and then apply something to the object, and it's going to be sort of defined, and there's no escaping hell. And it's going to go into the same sort of bucket as the SQL query. It just goes through optimization just as well. There's no difference there. But we have that to make, to basically give the programmer a choice to say, I want this to be a bit more defined. But we see a surprising amount of people writing SQL queries. I mean, that's also one of the reasons we went with SQL, is that there is, for computer scientists, I think, always a surprising amount of people out there that know some level of SQL, right? Which is, I think, one of the reasons why the language has kind of survived all attempts to kill it by computer scientists, because we just don't control the business analysts kind of out there that all know how to write SQL. We just have no, we don't teach them. It's not like a world we do. We want a hash table. SQL doesn't give us a hash table. So we'll do stuff. We'll invent other things to have a hash table. But you know, AI loves SQL because it's the mostly written about language out there. And it generates SQL extremely well because of that. It loves SQL. AI loves SQL. And the thing that people are talking about is, if SQL works so well for AI, then is the database really like that 80, 90% of the software stack we've all been waiting for? So we have an AI component and the database, or a database component and the AI. I don't know. It depends on who you're talking to. And that's it. I mean, I can see that for things like people doing analytics. And there's a bunch of companies that are building these dashboard generators on top of DuckDB that are working with AI to make that automatic and yada yada. Again, great. But not really my department, right? I mean, it feels like a bit, and it's a quote from Mark. It feels like a bit, you know, there's a gold rush and you sell shovels. Selling shovels is not glamorous. It is just a shop with shovels in it. But it earns a living, you know, it earns a living. It will probably make more money than all the gold rush people outside the door. And that's kind of how we see it. It's like, you know, we are happy to be a component for people building stuff, but it doesn't mean that we have to, you know, suddenly use learned indexes or whatever. It's not happening. I mean, that being said, we have done some stuff like, for example, DuckDB has support for vectors of floats, right? And it has support for vectors of anything, but it also has support for vectors of floats. And we have worked on supporting fixed size vectors. And we have done some stuff on compression of fixed sized vectors. So if you want to put your embeddings in DuckDB, they will be competently stored. But do you build a learned index on top of Static Harness? No. Wait, did they have a PhD doing it, you know? Then they had no choice. But what's also really beautiful in DuckDB, and I should mention this, I haven't spoken about this earlier, is that we have this extension ecosystem for DuckDB now, right? And extensions can push new indexes. So if you think, if you or some of the listeners think they really want to have a learned index in DuckDB, great. Make an extension that provides this index type. We'll even host it. We'll even deal with building and hosting and all that stuff and distribution for you. You can just say, install my crazy index from community that works inside DuckDB. And then you can use as much learned index as possible as you want. And that's, I think, the winning approach there, where you give people the possibility to do whatever they want, be it, you know, sensible in our opinion or not, and then see what happens. Yeah, like the expressivity of your extension model, by the way, it's amazing. Like, I think, like, I mean, like Geospatial, for example, coming in as an extension kind of shows, like, building Geo isn't easy. Like, it's really like it permeates kind of through the entire database stack. And this being possible to build as a DuckDB extension, I think it's super impressive. Yeah, well, thank you. We're not even done with this yet. So we're also currently working on making the parser pluggable, so that an extension can actually modify the syntax that DuckDB accepts with like new constructs, like new statements, of course, that has always worked. But now also modifying, for example, that you maybe you want to extend to see the select statement with like an as of timestamp or whatever construct. So that's going to be possible with this new parser that we're working on. We had like a paper at CIDR this year, describing that idea. So this extension thing is also something that, you know, that I think is really interesting as a sort of driver for growth of DuckDB, because it allows like random subcultures, and that isn't meant in a positive way, to do what they think, what is important to them, using DuckDB, using all the infrastructure, using all the high-performance operators, all that stuff, and focus on like their three functions or whatever, or their one file format or whatever. So see, Eldad, when you build your DuckDB data type with AI, you don't even need Hannes' code review. You can just turn it into an extension. You can, absolutely. You can ship new data types. No, I want to squeeze it below the extension. Primitive. I want it to be a primitive-based type, you know, comes with the... But okay, I'll use an extension. It is what it is. It will be easier for the AI to do it, actually. Most likely, yes. I think the AI has issues with like 200,000 lines or so of context. I think that starts to get a bit, you know, funky. Yeah. No, but I think it's really interesting. Sorry for the rant. It's all good. I love that we actually kind of went on to talk a bit about the extension model, because that's been something. They're also like, as a managed vendor, it's like almost impossible to kind of replicate, because you can't, like, if you run it on your own device, right, it's okay if you like modify your plan and you don't have to worry so much about the actual code you're running. It's like, we can't just add, like, let kind of customers add a custom optimizer rule to Firebolt and like run it as part of our binary. It's like the security implications, among many other things, are like just kind of like a showstopper for that. So yeah, like whenever I look at a DuckDB extension, it's like just always amazing to see. Yeah. I mean, I think what you see in hosted solutions is like usually like these like UDF runner sort of host processes, right, where you ship stuff back and forth to this process, and then you run whatever you want. And if that thing blows up, that's like on the user. Right. But even there it's not as expressive, right? Like I can't modify the parser. I can't optimize your rules. I can't add my own index type and so on. No, no. And I think that's also just one of these things that you just can't do, right? Like, I don't see any sort of SaaS thing allowing you to modify the code that's running to the degree. There's some interesting stuff that people have been doing with Wasm, though. I mean, if you'd want to run UDFs, I feel like Wasm has been sort of shown to be halfway decent to be sandboxed, right? So you could imagine doing that. And performance is not great, but it's okay-ish, much better than Python. So there are some sort of interesting developments, I think, from that front. Awesome. Cool. Hannes, any closing words from your side, any message you have to our listeners, anything you wanted to really chat about? Personally, I really like the sort of the golden age of databases that I think we're in, right? Like there has been sort of some dark ages between sort of in the 2000s and 2010s. And personally, as somebody who really likes tables and SQL, I'm quite happy. And it's really great to see things like Firebolt or others to really be working on core engine stuff that hadn't happened for a while. And I'm really happy to see that. So are we. As database nerds, so are we. Thank you so much for being on, Hannes. It was a pleasure having you. I hope that soon you'll get confirmation that you're actually running in space. We'll check in with you in like a year or something. Thanks for joining the show. Thanks a lot for having me. The Data Engineering Show is brought to you by Firebolt, the cloud data warehouse for AI apps and low latency analytics. Get your free credits and start your trial at firebolt.io.