---
title: "DuckCon #6 - State of the Duck"
summary: "DuckCon at DuckCon #6"
date: 2025-01-31T00:00:00
tags: ["duckcon", "transcript"]
slug: duckcon6
word_count: 2493
source_file: transcripts/2025-01-31-duckcon6.md
content_type: transcript
event: "DuckCon #6"
video_url: "https://youtu.be/sxpFmx97pxU"
---

*This transcript was AI-generated using Whisper and may contain minor errors.*

## Transcript

So welcome, everybody, to DAKON number six. It's hard to believe it's already number six. And people always ask us, what was DAKON one? Because we can't see it on the website. It was actually on Zoom, because there was a plague. So DAKON number six. It's number six here in our hometown. And I would like to welcome each and every one of you who came out. I've heard some stories of people traveling from very far. And I have to say, we are quite flattered. I also want to maybe not warn you, but inform you that this is the first time that we are live streaming DAKON to everybody. You know, hello, world, to anybody out there. And that is also the reason why we are in this particular time slot, because it sort of works for everyone. So people in China, for example, can watch. And people in the US can watch, although it's quite early. So I apologize to everybody in the US for that. We are doing this because we noticed that we are getting a lot of, for example, visitors to our website that were from places that we have never done a DAKON in, and might never do a DAKON in. And by live streaming, we can integrate everyone. Speaking of integrating, here's the QR code. It's also the same QR code as you have on the side there. And there's also an easy-to-remember domain name, qa.dakon.org. So we're going to use Slido, which is this website for asking questions. So for the Q&A after the talk, I will read questions from the iPad here. And you can also upvote other people's questions. It will help me to prioritize the questions to ask. So again, the QR code's going to stay on the side here. So you don't have to immediately write it down. Just wanted to let you know. This event would not be possible without the wonderful sponsors. So obviously, it's not free to run an event for free. And so we are very thankful to Monday.com to being a gold sponsor for this event. And we're also very thankful to Real and Crunchy Data for being silver sponsors for this event. Again, a big thanks. Give them a round of applause for sponsoring. Thank you. Yeah, and there should be some merch in your bags. Some people are also around. Go talk to them. But now back to the main event. We're talking here today. We are assembled here today to talk about Duck TV. And obviously, for DuckCon, for us, it's also super interesting because we do not always hear all the stories from users because we're fixing bug number 487 or something like that. So DuckCon is really meant as an event where you, people that use Duck TV, can talk to each other about what you like, what you dislike, things like that. This is really, truly inspiring to see where our sort of wild idea from seven years ago, I think, has led to. And it's really a pleasure to see you all here, as I've said. It's always a good idea to repeat the mission statement. Right? So this is something I learned in one of my presentation courses. And it took us, actually, some years to figure out what this was, even though we had an intuition. And the intuition is really to move from this world where people generally fear large data sets because they make everything more complicated to a world where you are no longer scared of this big pile of CSV files because you know, OK, Duck TV is most likely going to handle it, and that will be it. Right? So this is really where. And this is also where the motivation for Duck TV came from, was we saw people struggling with anything that didn't fit in Excel. And then sort of, you know, so the tools available at the time were just not nice or not instilling confidence. So that's really the way we want to be. And we're also helped by the fact And we're also helped by industry trends. So here is a very scientific plot that I made. No units. Excellent. But what has happened is that, also in the short time since we started work on Duck TV, is that the capabilities of a single node in terms of processing data have essentially risen quicker than the growth of useful data sets. And I actually made this slide a couple of years ago and predicted a data singularity where 99.9% of data analysis queries could run on a single node without any problems. And we thought, yeah, you know, this is future work. But then it actually happened that people confirmed this quite recently. Here's a post from FiveTrend from George Frazier who analyzed public disclosed data from Snowflake and Redshift and showed that the P99.9 of data set sizes was under 300 gigabyte, which is really shocking if you think about it after a decade of talking about big data. And Gabor here has actually done experiments on this, which neatly connects to the 300 gigabytes. So he has shown that we can actually run the industry standard benchmark TPC-H with a scale factor of 300, which is roughly equivalent to 300 gigabytes of input data on a Raspberry Pi. So these data sets are just not as big as we thought they were. The hardware that we have is also, together with software like DuckDB, shockingly capable in the sense of processing it. And if you add zeros to the number of the size of data here, we'll just have to go to a bigger computer. And on the right here, we actually recently ran scale factor 30,000, or Gabor did, on a machine with 96 cores. And you can kind of see how this single node capability is really growing. This is a slide I have always had at DuckCon. And you can see I have this old version of the slide here in this endless sort of loop into history that are just previous versions of the slides. I want to highlight some numbers on the adoption of DuckDB, which, as always, is blowing our minds. I want to highlight three things here. We have, in case you don't know, we have extensions for DuckDB for features that we don't really want to put in the core itself. And last month alone, we saw 32 million extension installs. So this is totally wild. Somebody typed in install Postgres or whatever. And that's been done 32 million times. We've also saw a crazy growth in the amount of unique visitors to our website. We now are around 1.8 million unique web visitors per month. And it's funny, because we accidentally made one of the bigger websites of this country. I think we have beaten the Lidl at this point, and for the people who know. And also, because of recent developments in social media space, we have started posting more to Blue Sky. We're also really happy to see a growing community there. If you're not on Blue Sky yet, I encourage you to do so. I'm also on Blue Sky. And the hashtag for data-related topics is just the best, because it's data-BS. And you can just type data-BS, and it's perfect. Yeah, so that's kind of the super, super high-level intro. And next, we will have Mark, who's going to tell you a bit about the technical aspects of DuckTV in the recent months. Oh. Hello, hello. Thank you all for coming. It's great to see such a turnout. Every year, DuckCon, it keeps on blowing our minds. It keeps growing, keeps getting bigger. It's fantastic. And it's great to have you all here and see all the cool things that you guys are doing. Very excited for all the next talks as well. Previous years, we had the tradition of doing a DuckTV sort of up-and-coming thing. We are not really doing a big talk about that today. Nevertheless, I do still want to talk a bit about the things we've been working on in the near future and what we're planning. One of the things that I think is kind of critical to a very cool future development that we have been working on and has been going on is the extension ecosystem. So you may have used DuckTV extensions before, either knowingly or unknowingly. Many of the things we do ourselves that we make for our users are extensions, like the HTTPS, the web connectivity, those are extensions. The Brocade Reader is an extension. You can do a lot of cool stuff with extensions. I think it's one of the cool future directions we want to take the project is to enable the community to do all of those same things. So that's why we made community extensions. And we keep on working on making it easier to use, easier to make and build these extensions, so that you guys can extend DuckTV and do all kinds of crazy stuff. And so you don't have to push it by us. You can do it all by yourself. There'll be some talks as well today talking about some of the very cool extensions that have been developed. So it's very nice. I want to briefly talk about this duck. This is the Harlequin duck. This is a duck that is native to the northeastern hemisphere that lives close to the oceans. Very pretty duck. It's also the duck that we have chosen for the next DuckTV release, DuckTV v1.2, that will be released next week. So if you haven't picked up yet, all of our releases are named after various different duck species. And this one is the Harlequin duck, or the Latin name, which is Histrionicus, which is releasing next week, we predict it will. There will be a blog post detailing all of the features in there. I think it's a very exciting release. But just to have some bullet points, the CSV reader has received a lot of love. It's even better now. We have some nice improvements to the friendlier SQL. The CLI autocomplete has been reworked. It's much better now. We've done a ton of performance optimization work. Many queries are a lot faster. And we're introducing the C API for the extensions. That should allow you to build community extensions much easier. And we're introducing a lot of logging features to make it easier to productionize, to put DuckDB into production and keep track of what is actually going on. As for what we're doing next, well, we have tons of different things we're working on. But I think this year is probably going to be the year of this. There's a house on a lake here. You guys probably kind of can figure out what that is. The lake house things is most likely going to be our main focus. So that's it. Happy to talk about any of these things after, during the breaks, or in the drinks after. And then I will now hand it over to the next speaker. Thank you. You can do questions. Oh, questions. We do have time for questions. And I get to pick which questions we're going to answer, which is not a conflict of interest in any way, shape, or form. But you have upvoted them. This is great. I can see that already. So I'll start with the highest voted one. If you could double your team tomorrow and focus on one major architectural change in DuckDB, what would it be and why? I will have Mark answer this very easy question. Of course, we're going to scale out, right? Scale out, yeah. No, no, no. GPUs. GPUs, no. Yeah, yeah, no. It's an interesting question. I think if we were to double our team tomorrow, we wouldn't do a big architectural change. I think we like our current architecture. We think it's been going very well. We would have more people to put on different projects, clients, integrations, and things like that, of course. Yeah, this is one of the things that we're seeing right now is that the amount of client integrations that we have, like the Java client and so on and so forth, that is something that could scale better with more people. The actual engine work, we don't think, could scale better. So that's something that we could put more people on. This is actually very active. Any near-term plans to add support for partitioning? Yes. This is also something we are planning to work on this year. Yeah, it's part of the Lakehouse formats. They all support partitioning. What are the future plans for DuckDB Wasm? Well, I don't know. To process queries, I suppose. But, yeah, the Wasm ecosystem, like the in-browser DuckDB, that's, of course, an ecosystem that's changing. The environment is changing fairly quickly. And so I think there's going to be some exciting stuff just from browsers making more things possible, Wasm moving into other places, things like that. But you could talk to Carlo. Who is, where is Carlo? There, back there, he's waving. So you can talk to Carlo if you have Wasm questions. What do you think about DuckDB replacing some SAS workflows in the financial and pharmaceutical industries? I suppose you mean SAS, the statistical software, I think. I remember if you used it at university way back when, they didn't like it a lot. So from that experience, I think DuckDB could replace a lot of these workflows. No, but, I mean, obviously, a tool that charges you 1,000 euros per person per year is going to have to be much, much better against one that doesn't cost anything, just saying. Yeah. Can you say a bit more about the upcoming Lakehouse in relation to MotherDuck? I think these are orthogonal things. I think this is not really related to MotherDuck. I mean, they will probably support Lakehouse as part of that as well, but it's separate. Yeah. Any plans to make it more easy to contribute to extensions? C++ is not my jam. Yeah, well. How could you not like C++? We love, no, okay, we get it. So, yes. Yes, absolutely. So that's one of the reasons that we're excited about the C API extensions. It's not because you can write extensions in C. It's because the C API is kind of this universal language you can use to write extensions in other languages. So one of the things we're planning to, like have already worked on is extensions supporting Rust and maybe also in Go in the future. So you can already develop extensions in Rust. There are some already.