---
title: "Seedwork"
description: "In the very earliest days of Object-Orientation, the OO advocates like me put a lot of attention into arguing in favor of reuse. Early on we talked about reusing of classes. Then we discovered that re"
date: 2003-09-11T00:00:00
tags: ["evolutionary design"]
url: https://martinfowler.com/bliki/Seedwork.html
slug: Seedwork
word_count: 442
---


In the very earliest days of Object-Orientation, the OO advocates
like me put a lot of attention into arguing in favor of reuse. Early
on we talked about reusing of classes. Then we discovered that reusing
individual classes, while it worked in some cases, didn't work so well
elsewhere. So we got into reusable frameworks, which got us part-built
applications of functionality.


On the technical side, this kind of reuse has been a success -
just look at the large libraries available with such environments as
Java and .NET (and not just OO - as CPAN demonstrates). But
particularly on the business side, such reuse hasn't been so quick to
appear. And of the technical side many people feel that many of the
frameworks they deal with are too complex for their purpose, and this
complexity gets in the way of making these things useful.


A [recent
weblog](http://www.artima.com/weblogs/viewpost.jsp?thread=8826) by Michael Feathers dug into this question, the [resulting

discussion](http://www.artima.com/forums/flat.jsp?forum=106&thread=8826) came up with an alternative notion - the seedwork. A
framework is supposed to be a part-baked application that you extend
in controlled ways to provide what you need. A seedwork is some
minimal functionality that you modify however you like to get what you
need. Of course this means that there's no way for you to get common
updates to the seedwork, once you grow it you own it. This is the kind
of copy and paste reuse that many people, including me, deride.


Maybe I shouldn't be so scornful. Frameworks and libraries work
very well when they are well-seasoned. But getting a good framework is
very hard. Seedworks are not as useful as a good framework, but are
easier to create and use. The point is not whether they are ideal, but
just whether they are useful.


And even mature reuse can often be a problem. We still haven't
really figured out how to deal with shared libraries that upgrade on
different schedules. We've all moaned at Microsoft's DLL-hell. Just
this week I found my RedHat system got wedged when I tried to install
some software and found my version dependencies were all screwed up
(that was half a day down the drain.) Maybe the versioning system in
.NET will solve this, but so far it's far too easy for even good
people to get nailed.


I've found that reuse (or avoiding duplication) within an
application is vital. But reuse across applications is much tougher,
primarily because an [ApplicationBoundary](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/ApplicationBoundary.html) is primarily a
social construction. That's yet more evidence that reusable frameworks
are much tougher than we think, and yet more reason that we should
consider less perfect alternatives - such as seedworks.
