---
title: "Lambda"
description: "As there is a growing interest in dynamic languages, more people   are running into a programming concept called Lambdas (also called Closures, Anonymous Functions or   Blocks). People from a C/C++/Ja"
date: 2004-09-08T00:00:00
tags: ["language feature"]
url: https://martinfowler.com/bliki/Lambda.html
slug: Lambda
word_count: 1138
---


As there is a growing interest in dynamic languages, more people
  are running into a programming concept called Lambdas (also called Closures, Anonymous Functions or
  Blocks). People from a C/C++/Java/C# language background don't have lambdas
  and as a result aren't sure what they are. Here's a brief
  explanation, those who have done a decent amount of programming in
  languages that have them won't find this interesting.


Lambdas have been around for a long time. I ran into them
  properly for the first time in Smalltalk where they're called
  Blocks. Lisp uses them heavily. They're also present in the Ruby
  scripting language - and are a major reason why many rubyists like
  using Ruby for scripting.


Essentially a lambda is a block of code that can be passed as an
  argument to a function call. I'll illustrate this with a simple
  example. Imagine I have a list of employee objects and I want a list
  of those employees who are managers, which I determine with an
  IsManager property. Using C#, I'd probably write it like this.


```

  public static IList Managers(IList emps) {
    IList result = new ArrayList();
    foreach(Employee e in emps)
      if (e.IsManager) result.Add(e);
    return result;
  }

```


In a language that has Lambdas, in this case Ruby, I'd write
  this.


```

def managers(emps)
  return emps.select {|e| e.isManager}
end
  
```


Essentially select is a method defined on the Ruby collection
  class. It takes a block of code, a lambda, as an argument. In ruby
  you write that block of code between curlies (not the only way). If the block of code
  takes any arguments you declare those between the vertical
  bars. What select does is iterate through the input array, executes
  the block of code with each element, and returns an array of those
  elements for which the block evaluated as true.


Now if you're a C programmer you probably think “I could do
  that with a function pointer”, if you're a Java programmer you
  probably think “I could do that with an anonymous inner class”.
 These mechanisms are similar to
  lambdas, but there are two telling differences.


The first one is a formal difference, lambdas usually define
  closures - which means they can refer to variables visible at the
  time they were defined. Consider this method


```

def highPaid(emps)
  threshold = 150
  return emps.select {|e| e.salary > threshold}
end
  
```


Notice that the code in the select block is referring to a local
  variable defined in the enclosing method. Many of the alternatives
  to lambdas in languages that don't have real closures can't do
  that. Lambdas allow you to do even more interesting stuff. Consider
  this function.


```

def paidMore(amount)
  return lambda {|e| e.salary > amount}
end

```


This function returns a lambda, indeed it returns a lambda whose
  behavior depends on the argument sent into it. I can create such a
  function with and assign it to a variable.


```

highPaid = paidMore(150)

```


The variable `highPaid` contains a block of code
     that will return whether a tested object
    has a salary greater than 150. I might use it like this.


```

john = Employee.new
john.salary = 200
print highPaid.call(john)
  
```


The expression `highPaid.call(john)` calls the `
      e.salary > amount` code I defined earlier, with the
      `amount` variable in that code bound the to the 150 I
      passed in when I created the proc object. Even if that 150
      value went out of scope when I issue the print call, the binding
      still remains.


So the first crucial point about lambdas they usually create
  closures - a block of code plus the bindings to the environment they
  came from. You can have lambdas that don't create closures, but such
  animals aren't very useful and are thus not very common - which is
  why closure is often used as an alternative term for lambda.
  12


1: 
        When I first published this bliki entry in 2004 I used the
        term “Closure” to refer to these languages features. At the
        time “closure” was often used in this way. Since then the term
        “lambda” became more popular, so I changed this bliki entry to
        follow the usage.


2: 
        Java's anonymous inner classes can access locals - but only if
        they are final.


The second difference is less of a defined formal difference, but
    is just as important, if not more so in practice. Languages that
    support lambdas allow you to define them with very little syntax.
    While this might not seem an important point, I believe it's
    crucial - it's the key to make it natural to use them frequently.
    Look at Lisp, Smalltalk, or Ruby code and you'll see lambdas all
    over the place - much more frequently used than the similar
    structures in other languages. The ability to bind to local
    variables is part of that, but I think the biggest reason is that
    the notation to use them is simple and clear.


A good case in point is what happened when ex-Smalltalkers started
  in Java. Initially many people, including me, experimented with
  using anonymous inner classes to do many of things that we'd done
  with blocks in smalltalk. But the resulting code was just too messy
  and ugly so we gave up.


I use lambdas a lot in Ruby, but I don't tend to create them explicitly 
and pass them around. Most of the time my use of lambdas is based
around [collection pipelines](https://martinfowler.com/articles/collection-pipeline) similar to the `select`
method I showed earlier. Another common use is the 'execute around
method', such as when processing a file.


```

File.open(filename) {|f| doSomethingWithFile(f)}

```


Here the open method opens the file, executes the supplied block,
  and then closes it. This can be a very handy idiom for things like
  transactions (remember to commit or rollback) or indeed anything
  where you have to remember to do something at the end. I use this
  extensively in my xml transformation routines.


Such use of lambdas is actually much less than what people in
  the Lisp and functional programming worlds do. But even with my
  limited uses I miss them a lot when programming in languages without
  them. They are one of those things that seem minor when you first
  come across them, but you quickly grow to like them.


**Other languages: **[C#
3.0](http://mysoftwarenotes.wordpress.com/2009/06/06/closures-in-c-better-known-as-lambdas/) |
[
Python](http://ivan.truemesh.com/archives/000392.html) |
[
Boo](http://boo.codehaus.org/Martin+Fowler%27s+closure+examples+in+boo)


Neal Gafter has an excellent posting on the [history of
    closures](http://gafter.blogspot.com/2007/01/definition-of-closures.html). Vadim Nasardinov led me to this interesting
    tidbit of history of [closures in Java](http://article.gmane.org/gmane.comp.lang.lightweight/2274) from Guy Steele.


## Notes


1: 
        When I first published this bliki entry in 2004 I used the
        term “Closure” to refer to these languages features. At the
        time “closure” was often used in this way. Since then the term
        “lambda” became more popular, so I changed this bliki entry to
        follow the usage.


2: 
        Java's anonymous inner classes can access locals - but only if
        they are final.
