---
title: "Japan"
description: "I'm back from my trip now, so in return for all the tips I got over the emails, here are some of my reflections from our three week trip to Japan."
date: 2004-04-27T00:00:00
tags: ["travel"]
url: https://martinfowler.com/bliki/Japan.html
slug: Japan
word_count: 986
---


I'm back from my trip now, so in return for all the tips I got
over the emails, here are some of my reflections from our three week
trip to Japan.


## Highlights

- The garden of Shoren-in, Kyoto. We visited this one just
after the crowds of cherry blossoms (and people) at the Heian-jingu,
so it was particularly peaceful. What I liked so much about this was
the way that garden and building flowed into each other, with strips
of garden in between the various buildings.
- The dinner spreads at the nicer Ryokans we stayed in. One of
the frustrations of eating in Japan is that it's difficult to order
and experiment with the food, so having a ryokan dinner just gives you a
spread full of lots of  inscrutable dishes was always fun. If you
don't stay at a Ryokan we got a similar meal at Ganko Nijo-en (see
tips).
- Japanese hospitality was remarkable. Even when our common
language was confined to little more than 'thank you', we saw time and
time again how people would naturally go out of their way to be
helpful. The level of service was better than anywhere else we've
been.
- The hike up Misen on Miyajima with views of the inland
sea.
- The moss garden of Jizo-in, Kyoto. The really famous moss
garden in Kyoto is Saiho-in, but the reservation process for getting
in was alarming. Lonely Planet led us to Jizo-in nearby.In fact the
carpets of moss and tree roots were so beautiful. American and English
gardens tend to treat moss as a weed that disfigures lawns - but we
find a moss carpet much more attractive than a lawn.
- The hot bath before dinner at a ryokan - just the thing to
feel relaxed before the splendid dinner.
- The volunteer English speaking guide at Himeji-jo.
- A lunch box of fried eel in the Kassui-ken restaurant inside
Koko-en in Himeji. It was obviously set up for tourists, but it made
me fall in love with fried conger eel.


## Frustrations

- The language barrier was particularly tough in Japan. I've
traveled often to places without knowing the language, but I found
Japan quite hard to deal with (compared to Europe, or even with
Thailand). Not being able to decipher the written language 
was difficult, although thank goodness most of the signs of the rail
lines had roman text.
- We didn't find much guidance on hiking at this time of year.
Most of the hiking in the Lonely Planet hiking book was high level and
needed to be done in summer. Miyajima only had a map for the one day
hike we did. Getting hiking information was generally hard. The one
area we ran into with decent hiking information as the Fuji Five Lakes
region, north of Mount Fuji.


## Tips

- Using the trains to get around worked very well. The signs
and information on the trains and in the stations stopped us from
ever feeling lost. Make sure you get a Japan Rail Pass before you go
to Japan (as you can only get it abroad) as it's both convenient and a
good deal.
- Make sure your luggage fits in the luggage lockers. Before I
left my contact Miwa Sato very helpfully gave us the dimensions of the
largest locker size - 100cm by 60cm by 30cm. The dimension to watch is
the smallest one as many bags I looked at were very close to the depth
of that minimum size.
- If you don't like the hassle of moving hotels, consider
spending the entire trip based in Kyoto. There's tons to do in the
city with all the temples and gardens, there are plenty of day-trip options to
interesting places within an hour or two on the train, and the Lonely
Planet hiking book suggested some nice sounding hikes. I'm glad we
wandered around the country a bit, but I could imagine enjoying a
Kyoto only vacation for a couple of weeks.
- We got our accommodations by turning up and asking at the
tourist information for the town we were in. In all cases we found the
tourist information to be very helpful, with particularly gold stars
going to the people at the Hiroshima Shinkansen desk and at Matsumoto.
Not just did they give excellent advice on Ryokans (for Miyajima and
Matsumoto), they also spoke fluent English.
- Two restaurants we really enjoyed in Kyoto. The first was
Karyo-an, an atmospheric grill place we got from the Kyoto visitors
guide. There they grill up various things in front of you, serving you
the food on lovely ceramics, and there's also an English menu. It's on
the east side of Kyamachi, just south of Okie on the third floor of
the Yurika building. The second is Ganko Nijo-en which serves mixed
dinner spreads comparable to what we got in the Ryokans, with a
splendid Japanese garden to gaze on. It's also on the east side of
Kyamachi, just south of Nijo (and in the Lonely Planet). There's a
picture menu to guide you, although you will need to be able to
decipher Kanji numbers for the prices. It also takes credit cards - a
useful treat for those final days when you want to avoid a last trip
to the ATM machine. Sadly both places have their signs in Kanji, which
I don't have to hand here.


I'd like to pay thanks to various people who met and looked after
	us. Microsoft were their usual excellent hosts in Tokyo, leaving us
with nothing to worry about during the business part of our trip. Miwa
Sato solved a couple of critical problems. Yoshi Nagase hosted us at
the Tokyo XP user group. Naoya Maekawa, his colleague from the XP
Kansai users group and their families joined us for a fun afternoon
away from the guidebooks in Kyoto.
