---
title: "JAOO 2005"
description: "This is an embarrassingly brief report of what has turned into my favorite conference. Sadly a clash with other business meant that I could only spend a day in Aarhus.JAOOcontinues to be a great confe"
date: 2005-10-24T00:00:00
tags: ["conferences"]
url: https://martinfowler.com/bliki/JAOO2005.html
slug: JAOO2005
word_count: 339
---


This is an embarrassingly brief report of what has turned into my
favorite conference. Sadly a clash with other business meant that I
could only spend a day in Aarhus. [JAOO](http://www.jaoo.dk/) continues to be a great
conference, although I'm hard put to say why. Somehow it manages to
retain the feel of a small conference while staying fresh and
broad.


Meeting people is much of the point of conferences for me, and
	this time the highlight was meeting Erik Meijer, one of the men
	behind [LINQ](http://msdn.microsoft.com/netframework/future/linq/) - the .NET language for integrated query. The idea is to
	have a single declarative query language that can access multiple
	data-stores - in particular SQL databases and XML documents. It
	delivers on the hints Anders Hejlsberg dropped at
	[OOPSLA2004](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/OOPSLA2004.html). I liked the fact that Eric seems to strike a
	rare balance between dynamic and static languages, looking for an
	approach that takes a different route to type checking.


There were also older friends to catch up with. I was interested
	(and pleased) to hear that Mary and Tom Poppendieck were getting
	busy - apparently Lean is now 'in' and many companies are getting
	lean initiatives and looking to apply them to software. I've long
	like the Poppendieck's approach of using lean manufacturing as
	[MetaphoricQuestioning](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/MetaphoricQuestioning.html) to  describe agile methods -
	despite my usual suspicion of such analogies.


On panels 'Bedarra' Dave Thomas and Brian Barry said that they
	believed the current spate of Open Source development was
	unsustainable. Much support for open source is funded by large
	companies, IBM's support for Eclipse is a long one. They felt that
	this support wouldn't last, if so there's likely to be quite a
	collapse in open source activity. (I'll stay silent on this question,
	I prefer to avoid trying to predict the future.)


On a very different note, I learned a new problem that
	Microsofties face: how to deal with your child who asks you why you
	work for the Evil Empire. I'm sure many open-sourcers hearts will go
	out to those sufferers in Redmond.
