---
title: "Rotation"
description: "I've spent a lot of time of the last year wandering around Thoughtworks, talking 	to lots of people on lots of projects. One message that's come home 	really firmly to me is the value of rotation."
date: 2005-02-03T00:00:00
tags: ["team organization", "thoughtworks"]
url: https://martinfowler.com/bliki/Rotation.html
slug: Rotation
word_count: 564
---


I've spent a lot of time of the last year wandering around Thoughtworks, talking
	to lots of people on lots of projects. One message that's come home
	really firmly to me is the value of rotation.


We practice rotation in lots of ways. One of the most notable is
	rotating around countries. We've put in a deliberate program to
	encourage people to spend 6-18 months in a different country. Living
	a good length of time in a different country does a huge amount to
	widen people's perspective of the world. I've benefitted personally
	from living both in the UK and USA, even though they are very
	similar cultures. This mental expansion is even greater for those
	that spend time in somewhere like India, where the cultural
	differences are greater.


Geographic rotation presents lots of challanges, particular for
	older people with familes. One of the things we need to figure out
	is how to make geographic rotation easier for people, so more people
	do it. Already there's a notion growing that to prosper in the
	company you need to spend a spell or two in a foreign office. But I
	wouldn't want this to be compulsory, because there often are genuine
	reasons why people can't do it.


My sense is that geographic rotation will be one of our key
	techniques to avoid the company dividing into national fiefs. We are
	very much of the lean belief that local optimization often gets in the
	way of global performance. So we need people to think of the
	company's success as a whole rather than the success of the office
	they work for.


As well as geographic rotation, we're also increasingly pushing
	project rotation. Time and time again I've listened to project teams
	talk about how bringing in new people with fresh ideas has
	invigorated the team. For those who rotate, there's also the benefit
	of more varied work.


One of the biggest difficulties in project
	rotation is that clients often don't like to lose known able people
	and get someone new and unproven. I quite understand this. With most
	consulting companies I would argue hard against allowing the
	consulting company to rotate - my mantra was “pick the people not
	the company”. I came to this view when working for a Big 8 (as it
	was in those days) consultancy. The typical tactic was to send in
	a strong team for the proposal and then swap them out with a
	distinctly inferior team once the contracts were signed. (In one case
	a project manager was sold to a client when the company already had
	that PM allocated to another project in another
	continent. What's worse they pretended to the client that the PM was
	still working on the project even when he was thousands of miles
	away. Oddly they were suprised when the client was annoyed.) One of
	Thoughtworks's difference is that there's no second rate team - but
	it
	takes time to clients to learn that this isn't just a marketing
	slogan.


Project rotation is particularly vital to help in propagation of
	techniques and skills. It's long been my view that knowledge
	management and reuse are primarily human issues - not a matter to
	technology or process. Rotation is a practice which we've seen to
	promote knowledge transfer and reuse, and I think its efficacy is
	due to the fact that it addresses the human element.
