---
title: "Web2.0"
description: "In the last few years there's been a lot of discussion about Web 	2.0, both about the concept and it's value as aNeologism. My involvement in this is limited, I've read and 	heard Tim O'Reilly on the "
date: 2006-12-14T00:00:00
tags: ["web development"]
url: https://martinfowler.com/bliki/Web2.0.html
slug: Web2.0
word_count: 824
---


In the last few years there's been a lot of discussion about Web
	2.0, both about the concept and it's value as a
	[Neologism](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/Neologism.html). My involvement in this is limited, I've read and
	heard Tim O'Reilly on the topic, and took part in a workshop he
	organized. There's a lot of confusion out there, however, so I guess
	it's time for me to make a futile attempt to reduce that
	confusion. (Since I'm interpreting Tim for much of this, if we
	disagree on anything you should believe him.)


A lot of the confusion in the Web 2.0 debate is due to people
	talking about it without really knowing what it is. It was born in 2004:


> The concept of “Web 2.0” began with a conference brainstorming
> session between O'Reilly and MediaLive International. Dale Dougherty,
> web pioneer and O'Reilly VP, noted that far from having “crashed”, the
> web was more important than ever, with exciting new applications and
> sites popping up with surprising regularity. What's more, the
> companies that had survived the collapse seemed to have some things in
> common.
> -- [Tim O'Reilly](http://www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/oreilly/tim/news/2005/09/30/what-is-web-20.html)


This quote (from the [

definitional article](http://www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/oreilly/tim/news/2005/09/30/what-is-web-20.html) on Web 2.0) is very revealing. It shows that
the term 'web 2.0' refers to a perceived shift going on then (and now)
in the nature of the world-wide web. That shift is the essence of the
meaning of Web 2.0.


> For nonspecialists, ie, ordinary people, “Web 2.0” simply means
> that something kind of new is happening on the Internet. It involves
> popular sites like MySpace and YouTube and Flickr and the
> proliferation of things like blogs. It involves people creating and
> sharing stuff online. It's a trend, a phenomenon.
> -- [Nicholas Carr](http://www.roughtype.com/archives/2006/12/the_semantics_w_1.php)


Tim went further than just attaching a name to a trend. Much
	of his discussion of Web 2.0 has been about trying to understand
	this trend. In particular he's focused on what are the things that
	are likely to succeed in this new web world. Much of his
	definitional article is about this, in particular he lists seven
	principles of Web 2.0:

- **The Web As Platform:** Software running as a service over the
		web (like Google), rather than on a desktop computer (like Netscape).
- **Harnessing Collective Intelligence:** aggregating information
		from lots of people rather than a few experts (amazon's community
		of reviewers, Google's use of links to drive its search algorithms).
- **Data is the Next Intel Inside:**Owning a specialized
		database (amazon's database of products, NavTeq's mapping data).
- **End of the Software Release Cycle:** high frequency of release
		of new functionality (Flickr deploying new builds up to every half an hour)
- **Lightweight Programming Models:** simple development
		environments that are easy for consumers to re-use (Google's
		simple mapping interface).
- **Software Above the Level of a Single Device:** lots of
		devices working together with the web (iTunes and iPods).
- **Rich User Experiences: ** more dynamic user-interfaces
		closing the gap between web and rich clients.


It's important to realize that these principles are descriptive
rather than prescriptive. They are Tim's reflections on what made web sites
successful rather than a set of instructions for what makes
something Web 2.0. They also form a pretty coherent statement of web
2.0 means. You often run into people who say that Web 2.0 is a
meaningless term, but that just makes me wonder if they have read Tim's paper.


I have some sympathy for Nicholas Carr's [view](http://www.roughtype.com/archives/2006/12/the_semantics_w_1.php)

that Web 2.0 isn't good jargon because it fails the test that
“specialists have to have a shared and clear understanding of what it
means.” However this lack of a clear understanding is due to the
inevitable process of [SemanticDiffusion](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/SemanticDiffusion.html) and is neither
complete nor unstoppable.


A common misconception I run into is that Web 2.0 is all new
stuff. Most of the ideas under Web 2.0 are actually quite old and have
been used on the web from early on, for instance Amazon's community or
the use of Wikis. The point is that *then* they were the minority. The Web
2.0 shift is about the principles that were used by a few in the 90's
becoming the majority in the future.


All in all I think that the underlying shift referred to by the
term Web 2.0 is a significant and real thing. Thus the concept of Web
2.0 is sound. We might argue about whether the term 'Web 2.0' is a
good term for this concept - but terms never please everyone and it's
stuck so there's little point arguing about it now. The more
interesting discussion is over the principles - are they the right set
of principles to describe this phenomenon? As part of this we can also
talk more concretely about patterns and practices that are in tune
with these principles. That's the discussion that Tim wanted to start
and that's the one I'm interested in.
