---
title: "Hot Rod"
description: "Early this year I did a lot of travel, so my writing ground a 	complete halt. I got back home a few weeks ago, hoping to get a lot 	of writing done. Well I've done some, but things keep coming up to 	"
date: 2006-05-22T00:00:00
tags: ["tools"]
url: https://martinfowler.com/bliki/HotRod.html
slug: HotRod
word_count: 2131
---


Early this year I did a lot of travel, so my writing ground a
	complete halt. I got back home a few weeks ago, hoping to get a lot
	of writing done. Well I've done some, but things keep coming up to
	keep me away: surgery to remove the pins from the accident, being
	[Flooded](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/Flooded.html). But the big productivity killer has been self
	inflicted -
	buying a new computer.


## The Beautiful Plan


My old setup was a desktop machine running Ubuntu, a company Dell
	D600 running Windows, and my PowerMac. Since the D600 is such a
	brick I hardly ever traveled with it, relying on the Mac. All of
	these bits of kit are about two years old, which is my threshold for
	getting something new. Thoughtworks replaced the D600-brick with a
	really nice Dell X1 (small, and 2.5lb light) which will
	replace the Mac for travel. (I like Macs, but 5lb is too much.) So it was up to me to figure out what to do about the desktop.


I rather like building my own desktop machines, that way I get to
	choose and know exactly what goes in it. The pain with this is
	knowing exactly which combination of components will work well
	together. As it turns out I quite often read [Ars Technica](http://arstechnica.com) and they
	regularly put out a system guide which provides a handy
	configuration. So I decided to follow their [guide for  April 2006](http://arstechnica.com/guides/buyer/system-guide-200604.ars)
	and build the [“HotRod”](http://arstechnica.com/guides/buyer/system-guide-200604.ars/3).


Actually I didn't follow the hot rod exactly. Ars guides tend to
focus on gamers, and I don't do computer games. So I decided to
downgrade a good way on the video output, choosing the ATI X800GTO
they picked for the budget box. I also didn't bother with sound,
relying just on what was on the motherboard - music is handled by a
[Squeezebox](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/Squeezebox.html). I did upgrade on the hard drive, adding their
suggested 10,000rpm WD Raptor.


When I buy a new desktop, I usually don't get a new monitor - as
	these last much longer than computers. However it was time for
	something new. One of my favorite answers to 'how do we improve our
	development productivity' is to tell them to buy larger monitors
	than they think they need. Screen real estate makes a huge
	difference to productivity, whether you are programming or
	writing. My old setup, a 21” CRT, used to be pretty good but now I
	wanted more. So I went for two Samsung SyncMaster 204B 20” LCD
	monitors.


This new setup, particularly going dual head, meant
	another question - how to co-exist multiple operating systems. I
	used to have the old desktop and the D600 hooked up with a kvm
	switch. That worked well as I could easily switch between Ubuntu and
	Windows depending on what I wanted to do. Kvm switching with dual
	heads sounded messy. However listening to the folks in our London
	office extol virtualization decided me on another option. Their
	view was that it was better to have Linux be the host and have
	windows run virtual. That suits me as I prefer the Linux's virtual
	desktop capabilities. (Windows has a virtual desktop manager in its
	[PowerToys](http://www.microsoft.com/windowsxp/downloads/powertoys/xppowertoys.mspx)
	which is worth having, but not as good as what comes with most X
	window managers.


## The Brutal Reality


So that was the plan - the next question is
	how are things working out (just in case anyone else fancies
	something similar.)


Putting the hardware together was easy -
	just took me a couple of hours. I booted up using a live Linux CD
	(Damn Small Linux as that was closest) and everything seemed to be
	working.


My first step was to install windows on one
	partition. Even though I'd intended to run Windows virtually, I
	wasn't convinced that this idea would work out best for me - and
	maybe someday I would want to do something with fancy graphics. This
	wasn't completely straightforward as the network and video wouldn't
	work properly with a straight install - but that was easily fixed by
	adding drivers for the motherboard (network) and video.


Windows usually just works with video, so the fact that this card
	needed a little extra work worried me - because X can be much more
	ugly. This was confirmed as I installed and then tried to boot
	Ubuntu Breezy - X failed to start. This is my big nightmare with
	Unix desktops - configuring X is one of the worse installation
	experiences you can go through. Even when you use a 'user-friendly'
	X installer, it proceeds to ask you “Would you like crypto-blue
	covariance adaptation?” (or something equally meaningful to me) and
	I have to guess an answer and hope my fumbling doesn't fry my new
	and expensive monitor.


Googling is the only solution here and eventually I found [this Ubuntu
	wiki page](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/BinaryDriverHowto/ATI)
which told me to install some additional packages. Well package
installation in Ubuntu is a breeze:


```

sudo apt-get install xorg-driver-fglrx
sudo dpkg-reconfigure xserver-xorg

```


I crossed my fingers and selected the suggested default for
	everything except picking fglrx as the web page told me. X still
	didn't start but the web page told me about the error (duplicate symbol rol_long') and how to fix
	it. I followed instructions and X burst into life. (It wasn't still
	quite right however. Running fglrxinfo told me it wasn't using the
	right drivers to get accelerated 3D - but that was fine
	for me, I'm mostly in a 2D world.)


Or more precisely it burst into half-life. I did all this with
	only one monitor - I like to do things one step at a time. Again it
	needed some googling to find out what to do - no nice control panel
	like there was on Windows (let alone the Mac where I ran dual-head
	over a decade ago.)


The first thing to decide is what kind of dual head to use. X has
	long been able to run multiple monitors - but not in the same way as
	Windows/Mac does it. The classic X way is to have separate X
	sessions on each monitor. The problem with this is that they are
	utterly separate, you can't drag a window from one monitor to
	another. Also any programs operating in both have to run separate
	instances (which means different firefox profiles etc). The
	advantage of this approach, however, is that you get separate
	virtual desktops for each. All in all I decided I was happy (for the
	moment) with classic X - an alternative is to use [Xinerama](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xinerama), but I'll
	look into that another time.


I tried to use fglrx-control to set up the dual monitors. No dice - I
	could set it for dual head, but it just forgot each time. In the end
	fglrxconfig helped me do the trick.


Next step was to try out VMWare. I downloaded VMWare Server from
	the web site (currently a free beta - if I like it I'll pay up when
	it releases.) It wasn't easy to get going - at times like this I
	really miss apt. I ran the installer script and it ran into problems
	with dependencies. I needed the following


```
sudo apt-get install make
sudo apt-get install gcc-3.4
sudo apt-get install linux-headers-amd64-generic
```


Once I did that VMWare installed just fine. I installed Windows,
	Visual Studio, Visio and other odds and ends. Everything seems to
	run just fine.


However all has not been well on the host. I would work for
	several hours happily then suddenly the screen would go black on my
	primary monitor (Screen 0 in X-speak). The monitor lost the signal
	completely. I eventually realized I could get it back by typing
	ctrl-alt-f5 to get a virtual console, which would appear on both
	screens, and then ctrl-alt-f7 to go back to X. Annoying. But really
	bad when I typed ctrl-alt-f5 and both monitors lost the signal. This
	left me stuck - even logging in from another machine and restarting
	X wouldn't bring them back - I had to reboot.


I put up with this for a while, but it got too annoying. So I
	decided that maybe I should go to Dapper Drake. Dapper is the next
	version of Ubuntu, still in beta but supposedly pretty stable. Maybe
	this would help, if nothing else it would allow me to use apt to
	install Java.


The install went very smoothly:


```
gksudo “update-manager -d”
```


I soon realized that the upgrade gave me the correct ATI
	drivers. (I'd wondered if the video drivers were part of the
	problem.) I also got ugly orange icons and an upgraded firefox. The
	bad news was some other problems I ran into.


The really bad one was that xemacs stopped working - a big deal
	as I use it a lot. The problem is something to do with finding
	colors - see [this discussion thread](http://www.ubuntuforums.org/showthread.php?t=90751) for more information and how I
	solved it.


The other problem is still with me - the machine won't
	shutdown. If I try shutting it down (by any route) the screens go
	black, the shutdown sound stops in mid squawk and everything just
	hangs. I have to turn it off at the mains.


The good news is that I haven't had a black screen moment since
		the Dapper install.


## Is It All Worth It?


I must admit that somewhere in the middle of dealing with emacs
failing and damn thing not rebooting cleanly I began to wonder if I
shouldn't have just got myself a Mac after all. I certainly have found
that I spend much less time faffing with my Mac than I do with either
Windows or Linux machines. Just as I was working on this [Parallels](http://www.parallels.com/) released a
virtualization envioronment for the mac. However now I've got it, I'd
like to get this working. In hindsight I think I may have made two mistakes: installing
Breezy rather than Dapper right away, and running the amd 64
architecture (instead of i386). Although Dapper has its faults, it
looks like installing it would have sorted out the video drivers
better; meaning I would have spent less time trying to get X to work.
I also may be suffering with stuff not working as well for amd64 code
as opposed to i386 code. (One problem is that I can't get a flash VM
going - they don't make one yet for Linux on amd64.)


Of course I don't really know if they were mistakes, because I
		could have spent just as much time with other problems. Certainly
		not being able to do a clean restart would have (and does) cause
		me no end of pain.


Should I switch to Windows as the host? It's a tempting thought
		- and I might have done it if I couldn't fix emacs. I do like the
		  ease of installing stuff on Ubuntu and the virtual desktop
		  management is very handy. I've certainly had my days of angst in
		  Windows in the past. All in all a tough call, but we'll see. I
		  do like having windows in the VMWare image. Even if I do have to
		  switch to another Linux installation I can just take the VMWare
		  image with everything installed over to the new
		  machine. Installing software is a guaranteed big time killer on
		  windows - even free downloads have to be individually visited
		  and downloaded. Having said that I haven't spent a lot of time
		  in Visual Studio yet - that will be the real test of the
		  virtualization.


## Update (Jun 16)


Several people suggested that getting doing a
		clean Dapper install would be better than upgrading from
		Breezy. This week I was back from China; while I was away
		Dapper was released. Updating my system still isn't allowing me to
		do a clean shutdown, so I downloaded the final Dapper CDs to see
		how they might work. The result isn't that encouraging. Both the
		AMD 64 and i386 CDs failed to start into X in the default
		startup. If I tried the safe graphics mode in AMD 64 I heard gnome
		appear, but my screens were blank. I did get working system (on
		one screen) with i386 CD in safe graphics mode. There's a good bit
		of conversation on the Ubuntu forums about problems getting ATI
		graphics cards working.


So my current feeling is that my setup isn't really that good
		for Ubuntu, but I do have it working. Since the Dapper update I
		haven't had the problem of my screens going blank on me while
		working, so my only issue is the inability to do a clean
		shutdown. For the moment I can live with that - I'm not inclined
		to spend more time trying to futz with things further. However I wouldn't
		recommend my setup to anyone else.
