---
title: "Book Code"
description: "I don't not write much production code these days, but I still     spend quite a few hours writing code. This code is a particular     form of code, meant for explaining ideas in books. Book code isn'"
date: 2007-12-04T00:00:00
tags: ["writing"]
url: https://martinfowler.com/bliki/BookCode.html
slug: BookCode
word_count: 446
---


I don't not write much production code these days, but I still
    spend quite a few hours writing code. This code is a particular
    form of code, meant for explaining ideas in books. Book code isn't
    quite like real code, there are some different forces to consider
    when writing it.


One question is the choice of language. I need to write code in a
  language that as many of my readers can read and follow. I try to
  write about ideas that are platform independent, but I need code to
  be precise. So I need to pick some widely readable language that
  people can follow.


In my early days the two largest OO languages were Smalltalk and
  C++. Both had faults, Smalltalk was too weird for non-smalltalkers
  and C++ was too full of sharp edges to get right. Java was a godsend
  for me. Anyone with a C/C++ background could read it. Even most
  smalltalkers could hold their noses and understand what I was
  coding. That's why the refactoring book was in Java.


Later on .NET appeared. The nice thing here was the C# was mostly
  the same as Java, so I could use the two pretty interchangeably. I
  liked to use both to reinforce that the ideas I was writing about
  were useful in either case.


That situation is getting more difficult these days, particularly
  with writing about [DomainSpecificLanguages](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/DomainSpecificLanguage.html). Java and C#
  are diverging, and some things I want to illustrate require features
  that neither of them have. I do much of my personal programming in
  Ruby, which is very well suited to DSLs, so I will use Ruby as my
  first choice for this situation. But other languages have
  contributions too. I need to balance illustrating various language
  capabilities for DSLs against letting the book become a hodgepodge
  of language tidbits.


Another issue with book code is to beware of using obscure
  features of the language, where obscure means for my general reader
  rather than even someone fluent in the language I'm using. A good
  example of this is that when I write examples using Ruby, I've often
  shied away from using [collection pipelines](https://martinfowler.com/articles/collection-pipeline/), even
  though I use them heavily in my own Ruby code. This is because I
  consider that programmers from a curly-brace background will find it
  harder to understand those kinds of expressions. So I sacrifice
  fluent Ruby in order to reach those readers.


Again this is much harder for a DSL book. Internal DSLs tend to
  rely on abusing the native syntax in order to get readability. Much
  of this abuse involves quirky corners of the language. Again I have
  to balance showing readable DSL code against wallowing in quirk.
