---
title: "DSL Q & A"
description: "I was asked to put together a discussion of DSLs for   non-technical types. Maybe I've been reading too muchStephen O'Grady, but I felt an   irresistible urge to do it in a Q and A manner. So here it "
date: 2008-09-09T00:00:00
tags: ["domain specific language"]
url: https://martinfowler.com/bliki/DslQandA.html
slug: DslQandA
word_count: 1023
---


I was asked to put together a discussion of DSLs for
  non-technical types. Maybe I've been reading too much [Stephen O'Grady](http://redmonk.com/sogrady/), but I felt an
  irresistible urge to do it in a Q and A manner. So here it
  comes.


**What is a Domain Specific Language?**

A Domain Specific Language (DSL) is a computer
      programming language of limited expressiveness focused on a
      particular domain. Most languages you hear of are General
      Purpose Languages, which can handle most things you run into
      during a software project. Each DSL can only handle one specific
      aspect of a system.

**So you wouldn't write a whole project in a
      DSL?**

No. Most projects will use one general purpose language
      and several DSLs

**Are they a new idea?**

Not at all. DSLs have been used extensively in Unix
      circles since the early days of that system. The lisp community
      often talks of creating DSLs in lisp and then using the DSLs to
      implement the logic. Most IT projects use several DSLs - you
      might of heard of things like CSS, SQL, regular expressions and
      the like.

** So why are they getting a lot of noise
    now?**


Probably because of Ruby and Rails. Ruby as a language has
      many features that make it easy to develop DSLs and the people
      who got involved in the Ruby community have been familiar with
      this approach from elsewhere, so they took advantage of these
      features. In particular Rails uses several DSLs which have
      played a big role in making it so easy to use. This in turn
      encouraged more people to take up these ideas.


Another reason is that many Java and C# systems need to have
      some of their behavior defined in a more dynamic way. This led
      to complex XML files that are difficult to comprehend, which in
      turn led to people exploring DSLs again.


** So DSLs can be used with languages other than
      Ruby?**

Yes, as I indicated DSLs have been around for much
      longer than Ruby has. Ruby has an unobtrusive syntax and
      meta-programming features that make it easier to create more
      elegant internal DSLs than languages like C# and Java. But there
      are useful internal DSLs in Java and C#.

**What's the distinction between internal and external
      DSLs?**

An
**internal DSL**
is just a particular idiom of
      writing code in the host language. So a Ruby internal DSL is
      Ruby code, just written in particular style which gives a more
      language-like feel. As such they are often called
**Fluent
      Interfaces**
or
**Embedded DSLs**
. An
**external DSL**
is a completely separate language that is parsed into data that
      the host language can understand.

**Why are people interested in DSLs?**


I see DSLs as having two main benefits. The most common
        benefit is that they make certain kinds of code easier to
        comprehend, which makes it much easier to modify, thus
        improving programmer productivity. This is worthwhile all on
        its own and is relatively easy to achieve.


The most interesting benefit, however, is that a well designed
        DSL can be understandable by business people, allowing them to
        directly comprehend the code that implements their business
        rules.


**So is this the hook - business people write the rules
      themselves?**

In general I don't think so. It's a lot of work to make
      an environment that allows business people to write their own
      rules. You have to make a comfortable editing tool, debugging
      tools, testing tools, and so on. You get most of the benefit of
      business facing DSLs by doing enough to allow business people to
      be able to read the rules. They can then review them for
      accuracy, talk about them with the developers and draft changes
      for developers to implement properly. Getting DSLs to be
      business readable is far less effort than business writable, but
      yields most of the benefits. There are times where it's worth
      making the effort to make the DSLs business-writable, but it's a
      more advanced goal.

**Do you need special (ie expensive) tools?**


In general, no. Internal DSLs just use the regular
        facilities of the programming language that you are using
        anyway. External DSLs do require you to use some special tools
        - but these are open source and are very mature. The biggest
        problem with these tools is that most developers aren't
        familiar with them and believe they are harder to use than
        they really are (a problem exacerbated by poor
        documentation).


There are exceptions on the horizon, however. These are a
        class of tools that I call a
        [LanguageWorkbench](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/LanguageWorkbench.html). These tools allow you to define
        DSLs more easily, and also provide sophisticated editors for
        them. Tools like this make it more feasible to make
        business-writable DSLs.


**So is this a repeat of the dream of developing
      software without programming (or programmers)?**

That was the intent of COBOL, and I don't think there's
      any reason to think that DSLs will succeed where COBOL (and so
      many others failed). What I think is important is that DSLs
      allow business people and developers to collaborate more
      effectively because they can talk about a common set of precise
      rules that are the executable code.

**When should I consider making a DSL?**

When you are looking at an aspect of system with rich
      business rules or work-flow. A well-written DSL should allow
      customers to understand the rules by which the system works.

**Isn't this going to lead to a cacophony of languages
      that people will find hard to learn?**

We already have a cacophony of frameworks that
      programmers have to learn. That's the inevitable consequence of
      reusable software, which is the only way we can get a handle on
      all the things software has to do these days. In essence a DSL
      is nothing more than a fancy facade over a framework. As a
      result they contribute little complexity over what is already
      there. Indeed a good DSL should make things better by making
      these frameworks easier to use.

**But won't people create lots of bad DSLs?**

Of course, just like people create bad frameworks. But
      again I'd argue that bad DSLs don't do much additional harm
      compared to the cost of bad frameworks.