---
title: "Semat"
description: "SEMAT(Software Engineering Method and Theory) is   an effort initiated by Ivar Jacobson, Bertrand Meyer, and Richard   Soley. Its stated aim is to “refound software engineering based on a   solid th"
date: 2010-04-16T00:00:00
tags: ["certification", "process theory"]
url: https://martinfowler.com/bliki/Semat.html
slug: Semat
word_count: 312
---


[SEMAT](http://www.semat.org) (Software Engineering Method and Theory) is
  an effort initiated by Ivar Jacobson, Bertrand Meyer, and Richard
  Soley. Its stated aim is to “refound software engineering based on a
  solid theory, proven principles and best practices”. Like many
  notorious people in the software world I was invited to
  participate. Thus far I've declined and feel the need to explain why.


The [call for action](http://www.semat.org) seemed
  somewhat vague to me. Although it derided fads and fashions, it
  seemed very much like a fashion statement itself. To better
  understand what was going on I took a further look at some of the
  initial publications in Dr Dobb's Journal. From here I got the
  distinct impression that the central thrust of the initiative is to
  create a software meta-method-kernel - essentially a set of common
  process elements for software developments that you can rigorously
  compose into a method for your own project.


At this point I lost interest. I spent a fair bit of time in the
  80's and 90's mucking around with this idea. In the end I decided
  that it was too hard and of limited value. Why this is so was
  primarily crystallized for me by Alistair Cockburn who explained
  that since people are the central element in software development,
  and people are inherently non-linear and unpredictable - such an
  effort is fundamentally doomed. Or at least it is until people
  become predictable agents that can be described with tractable
  mathematics - for which event I'm not holding my breath.


My views have since gone along the lines that software process is
  a much more multi-faceted thing than what a meta-method-kernel would
  usefully describe. Alistair's work on describing methods strikes me
  as a much more realistic approach.


Alistair actually did get involved in SEMAT and attended their
  inaugural meeting. His [decision to withdraw](http://ac.cockburn.us/2987) further
  reinforces my lack of interest to participate myself.
