---
title: "Canon 60D"
description: "When I first made the move to aDigitalSLRI deliberately bought a cheaper camera - a Canon Rebel XTi/400D. I did this partly to put more money to lenses, but also because I knew that technology would m"
date: 2011-02-22T00:00:00
tags: ["gadgets", "photography"]
url: https://martinfowler.com/bliki/Canon60D.html
slug: Canon60D
word_count: 320
---


When I first made the move to a [DigitalSLR](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/DigitalSLR.html) I
deliberately bought a cheaper camera - a Canon Rebel XTi/400D. I did
this partly to put more money to lenses, but also because I knew that
technology would move on and I'd be looking to replace the body in a
few years.


I got the itch this year, and was sorely tempted by the [Canon Rebel T2i/550D.](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B0035FZJI0/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=B0035FZJI0&linkCode=as2&tag=martinfowlerc-20) It seemed to be almost
the quality jump that would make me get my credit card, but not
quite. As I considered the purchase I felt that I needed something
more before I'd make the jump, and one something that would make the
difference was a articulated screen for live view.


Serious photographers tend to dismiss the importance of an
articulated screen, saying that it's only worthwhile for video
work. But while I use the viewfinder for 98.37% of my shots, from time
to time I find shooting angles that are just too awkward or impossible
to do. So when I saw the [Canon 60D](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B0040JHVCC/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=B0040JHVCC&linkCode=as2&tag=martinfowlerc-20)
announced, finally getting the articulated screen, I knew I wouldn't
be able to resist it. I bought it the day after I read that Apple
supported its raw format.


Here's some initial thoughts

- The biggest suprise plus for me is (ironically) the viewfinder
which is much brighter and bigger. I've probably got more enjoyment
out of that upgrade than anything else.
- The overall feel and ergonomics is much better than the 400D, but
fortunately the weight isn't much more. Some people bemoan dropping
the magnesium body from the 50D, but I'm happy with a lower-weight
option.
- I'm not a heavy flash user, but really like the fact that I can use
the 60D as a master. This allows me to easily play with moving my
speedlight off-camera for nicer looking flash photos.


And yes, the articulated screen gets very occasional but very much
appreciated use.
