---
title: "Musings on Ebooks"
description: "It's only just over a year since I got my first ebook reader. Now I only buy paper books when I really have to. I wrote my last book thinking of it primarily as a paper book, but that will be the last"
date: 2011-05-05T00:00:00
tags: ["writing"]
url: https://martinfowler.com/articles/ebook.html
slug: ebook
word_count: 3058
---


For a full-time technologist, I can be remarkably ludditly
sometimes. Even as 2009 drew to a close, I was resisting getting hold
of an ebook reader. While the weight of the traditional paper reader
was a drag, I appreciated its lack of DRM and the battery life too much
to switch to an electronic form. Now a year later, I prefer to buy
books in electronic form. I only get paper for a book I really want
and can't get virtually.


As an avid reader, and somewhat successful writer, I can't but be
moved by this moment in history. I think we are at a major shift for
the way people interact with what we currently think of as books. I
have no certainties about where we are going, but feel compelled to
describe the landscape as I see it now.


## As a reader


My initial revelation was the iPad. Although I had
expected to like the device, I was surprised by how much I liked
it. After a few months of using it I decided to get a [Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B002Y27P3M/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=B002Y27P3M&linkCode=as2&tag=martinfowlerc-20) as well. I did this in the full
knowledge that it was really a waste, since the kindle software on the
iPad did everything I needed, but as an author I wanted to get a feel
of what many readers would be using. What I discovered was that the
kindle was so light (and small) that I find I carry it with me on
trips in addition to the iPad. It contributes negligible extra
weight, and its lightness makes it more comfortable to read prose
books.


The fact that I travel so much is a big reason why I like
tablets. In the past trading off reading material for weight was
always a fraught decision, particularly with long trips to non-English
speaking places. Now I can easily load up with a couple more books
than I need, and even then all I need is an internet connection if I
need any more. I found this very handy on my recent trip to India,
particularly when my [favorite
newspaper](http://www.economist.com/) launched its iPad app.


The shift to digital changes many of our assumptions about books,
and not always in a good way. The ownership rules about a physical
book are well-understood: I have a clearly delineated thing that I can sell, lend, or give
away. Virtual books limit these options - but they give us new
ones. As with other digital products, we have to develop and get used
to a whole new model for ownership and access. As with most changes
we'll regret what we lose twice as much as appreciate what we'll gain
until we get to the new status quo, whatever that becomes.


## As a writer


For most of the time I was writing my DSL book, I imagined it as a
physical book, much like my other books. That won't be the case
again. If I summon up the enthusiasm to write another book, I reckon
I'll be imagining most people reading it on various tablet devices,
with only a minority using paper, if paper is an option at all.


As I got close to publication for the DSL book, I began to recognize
this new reality. As well as the paper form, I have readers on iPad,
Kindle, the safari books online website1, and even the iphone. Each of
these has different characteristics, which requires me to rethink
elements of how I construct the book.


1:


A web business owned jointly by Pearson and
    O'Reilly. Membership in safari books online isn't cheap, but it
    does allow you access to all of their technical books, which is a
    very handy resource.


Take one simple example - the diagrams. My books have always been
monochromatic, so when I draw diagrams I do them in black and
white. This is still true for the paper and kindle forms, but not for
the web and epub versions. But this makes things tricky. Color is an
opportunity to provide another channel of semantic information, but I
have to be wary of using it if a large segment of my audience can't
see the colors. Do I make the most of the opportunity of the richer
format, or do I stick with the lesser, but more available capability?


One definite change I made with this book was to number my
sections. In the past I've not done this, as people can refer to
something within the book by a page number. But since ebooks don't
have pages, I now need a regular way to point into the book. Mostly
this does not affect the design of the book, since section numbers and
cross-references can easily be automatically generated in the
production software, but it does make a subtle difference. In P of
EAA, my chapters were groups of related patterns. However if I did
that I'd end up with subsections with 4 part numbers (1.2.3.4) which I
prefer to avoid. So for the DSL book I gave each pattern its own
chapter. This led to lots of chapters, but allowed me to retain 3 part
section numbers throughout the book. My suspicion is that we'll find
more of these subtle interactions between the logical structure of a
book and the way that structure plays out in its various
representations. While it's nice to focus on logical structure in a
way that's independent of its presentation, there are always cases
like this that disturb the comfortable abstraction. 2


2:


And that's without even considering cases where the physical
    representation is part of the book's design. In Refactoring, the
    opening chapter uses the left and right pages to show before and
    after code segments. I like how that worked really well, but it's
    impossible to do with ebooks.


## On the form


With all this change, it seems easy for people to predict the end
of books. I don't see this. For me the book isn't so much the physical
form, or the delivery mechanism. Instead it's the packaging of the
content. What makes a book hard to write, at least for me, is pulling
together and organizing a large body of material. This is why a good
book is more than a couple of dozen articles. Tablets don't change the
need to take material and organize it like this, although they do
alter the way you can present that material.


Some people argue that videos will kill off books. I don't think
so, essentially because video is really such a poor medium for
communicating things in depth. I can read text far faster than I can
watch a video of someone talking. I can easily skim text and jump
backwards and forwards. I can easily follow cross-references. All of
this makes me prefer text to audio/visual when I'm trying to
understand something. (It's also why I'm not a big fan of conference
talks.)


It is interesting to me to see how video can be incorporated into
books. Certainly for mechanical tasks, it's really nice to have a
snippet of video to explain how to do something. I find it interesting
to experiment to see how motion graphics can help explain
concepts. But I still prefer text as the primary medium, with video
playing a supporting role.


## Formats


One of the open questions for ebooks what format to use. There are
four formats that are in reasonably common use: PDF, ebook, kindle,
and HTML.

- *PDF* has been a common print + electronic format for many years. As
a result it's a mature format that you can read on lots of
devices. Its biggest problem (and arguably its strength) is that it's
delivered with a fixed display (page) size in mind. This means it
doesn't reflow well for different sized tablets. On the other hand it
does allow good control for publications that take design very seriously.
- *epub* is the open format for books. Unlike PDF it supports
differently sized devices, which is why many people (including me) see
this as a more serious choice for books. I've read epub books on
my iPad but I haven't yet experimented with producing them.
- *kindle* (mobi) is Amazon's proprietary format. Its disadvantage is
that it's tied to Amazon, which is less of an issue at the moment
since Amazon have such a big hold on distribution. I'm told the format
is more limited than epub (but again I haven't tried it, other than as
a reader). Amazon believe that controlling the format and tying it to
their own hardware and software readers will allow them to do more
with the format in the future. It certainly will be interesting to see
the contrast between open epub and closed kindle over the next few years.
- *HTML* isn't generally thought of as an ebook format, since it's
designed so much for online usage. But it is important to several
publishers if they can make books available through a web delivery
mechanism. Further developments
with HTML 5 and offline storage may lead to more people exposing books
as HTML with the offline storage used to allow people to read the
books without an internet connection.


At the moment I'm certainly unsure where things will go. On the
whole I don't think PDF is a good route for electronic publication
since the fixed page size is much more of a problem than a
help. Kindle's format offers less options, but has a big reach of
readers - especially given the kindle hardware's nice form factor. The
fact that it's proprietary is also a negative, but again Amazon's
reach currently makes up for it. Essentially for book material you
need to do both epub and kindle, but then have to figure out how to
live with the limitations of the kindle compared to epub. Do you limit
yourself to what will work in both, or two versions that can play to
the strengths of both platforms?


The other thought is go beyond the ebook formats themselves and
publish material as a tablet app - which allows full use of the capabilities
of the platform itself. At the moment I'm not tempted by this. There's
too much churn the in app formats - and when I'm working on a book I
want something that will last for a decade or so. This does, however,
raise some interesting questions of what can be done with relatively
open formats, such as HTML 5, and a tablet form factor. Or perhaps
some specialized variant of book format for particular kinds of
book.3


3:


A good example of these are travel guides. Their topic is such
    that a specialized information schema, based on point-of-interest
    rather than chapters and paragraphs, make sense. Lonely Planet is
    shifting to thinking of their content as a populated database that
    can be represented in various formats, which include tablet apps
    as well as epub documents and their website.


## The relationship between publishers and readers


I remember an early editor of mine at Pearson4 talking about how much he was looking forward to
disintermediating the big book stores. The distribution of physical
books takes a big chunk of revenue - usually just over 50% of a book's
cover price goes to the book stores and book distributors (such as [Ingram](http://www.ingrambook.com)). Since an author's
royalties are usually based on the what the publisher gets, reducing
this would improve matters for authors too. As I write this, [Borders is bankrupt](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-12484478),
so the disintermediation could be said to be going full swing. However
what seems to be happening is a change of distributor. Amazon has
become the big player in book distribution over the last decade. As
well as doing a good job with physical books, they have also got an
early lead in electronic books too.


4:


Publishers, like many enterprises, have undergone lots of
    consolidation over the years. As a result there are separate
    notions of publisher and imprint. A publisher is a company that
    publishes books. Thus far, all my books have been published by
    Pearson. However you don't see Pearson's name that prominently on
    my books, instead you see Addison-Wesley. Addison-Wesley is the
    imprint, essentially the brand-name used for books like
    mine. Pearson owns many imprints including Prentice Hall,
    Peachpit, and Addison-Wesley. In some cases the imprint and the
    publisher is the same, such as O'Reilly.


Pearson is in fact much larger even than that. Pearson also
    includes Longman books, The Economist, and the Financial Times.


The alternative is for publishers to get a direct relationship with
readers. A great example of a company doing this is the Pragmatic
Programmers (usually referred to as the “prags”). The best way to buy
an ebook from the prags is to go directly to their website. Once you
get the book you can download it in multiple formats: PDF, epub, and
kindle. You can download it as often as you like and in as many
formats as you like. You can get a paper copy too at a reduced
price. I really like that I can read their books in multiple formats
easily. And I'm sure their authors like the fact that they get more
money by disintermediating the distributors.


Large publishers, such as Pearson, have different challenges to
small ones. If they try to disintermediate, they can run into nasty
fights with their distributors. They also have existing legal
agreements to honor. On the other hand they can carry enough weight to
influence even such a large distributor as Amazon.


One of the open questions around all this is what does the reader
buy? The traditional approach is that the reader pays for the
representation of a book, each physical copy of a book is a separate
thing to pay for. The Prags' model is different, when I buy an ebook
from them I am buying access to the content of the book - and I can
take as many representations (epub, kindle, etc) as I like. The only
representation I pay extra for is the paper one, should I wish to have
it.


The Economist's model is like this too: I've been a subscriber to
The Economist for a long time and it's always given me a copy of the
paper representation plus access to the web site. Over time they've
added audio downloads and iPhone/iPad apps. All of these
representations are included in the subscription price.


In contrast I was subscriber to Zagat's. When they came out with an
iPhone app, I had to pay for it again to read the same content as one
their website. There the payment was for the representation (website
or app) rather than for content.5


5: 
I ended up dropping the website subscription in favor of the iPhone
app since it was far more convenient.


## The Production Process


The demands of ebooks places a lot of pressure on the production
  process. If you want to be able to produce output for multiple
  different formats easily, you need a highly automated
  process. Furthermore the source files for that process need to be
  based on the semantic structure of the book, as opposed to its
  physical representation on paper.


Here again the prags have led the way (in no small part because
  they are programmers themselves). They have built up a complete
  tool-chain that goes from an XML source file that captures the
  semantic structure of the book and can produce camera-ready output
  for print and multiple ebook formats. On top of that they make use
  of source control on the book text itself to enhance collaboration
  during the book production process.


When I decided to stick with Pearson for my DSL book, I had to do
  without the prags' expertise. For my previous book I had used a
  similar approach during the drafting of the book, but cut over to a
  more old fashioned approach once I reached the final draft. For my
  DSL book I was determined to keep an automated, version-controlled
  process throughout the entire system. This is somewhat of a struggle
  with Pearson, since it's a big company that has to mostly deal with
  authors who are used to a more traditional process. Fortunately the
  people I worked with are keen to support this style of working and
  were able to work with me, although it did require a fair bit of
  programming on my part to make it all flow.


In the future I firmly believe this kind of automation will
  become more of an imperative, particularly if we want to push the
  boundaries of what a book should look like in a world of multiple
  tablets.


## The Value of Publishers for Authors


When I've been asked about how publishers are valuable to an
  author, my emphasis was on getting books into bookstores. My regular
  counter-example was Dorset House, a publisher who did some fine
  books that you could never get hold of. But the move to internet
  sales changes the equation. At the moment one could argue that the
  only bookstore that matters is Amazon. If you can get your books
  there, does a publisher help?


Self-publishing has always had a reputation of being for cranks,
  yet there are some well regarded exceptions - Edward Tufte is a good
  example. With ebooks there is much more of an argument for
  self-publishing. There's a growing segment of authors like [Amanda
  Hocking ](http://www.businessinsider.com/amanda-hocking-2011-2)and [Joe
  Konrath](http://jakonrath.blogspot.com/) who are doing well selling lots of copies of very cheap
  books (under $5). By self-publishing there may be a route to lower
  the prices of books to the reader and still getting more than the
  traditional route offers. (An author usually gets about 5-10% of the
  cover price of a book.)


I've known other tech-authors who have given self-publishing a
  try and found it more trouble that it was worth. And there is the
  Prags who went into self-publishing and turned into a full-time
  business. (Ed Yourdon followed that same path a couple of decades
  earlier.) Both are examples of how common it is for people to
  underestimate the amount of work it takes to publish - for people
  seem to either give up to turn into their full-time job. But with
  such disruption to the book business I cannot exclude the
  possibility that there will be a shift that makes it worthwhile for
  independent authors.


---
