---
title: "Infodeck"
description: "When I rant on at my colleagues about the evils ofSlideuments, I do hear a useful push-back. Many   people now like to communicate through slide decks that aren't meant   to be used for presentations,"
date: 2012-11-16T00:00:00
tags: ["presentation technique", "infodecks"]
url: https://martinfowler.com/bliki/Infodeck.html
slug: Infodeck
word_count: 1108
---


When I rant on at my colleagues about the evils of
  [Slideuments](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/Slideument.html), I do hear a useful push-back. Many
  people now like to communicate through slide decks that aren't meant
  to be used for presentations, just to be read. People like me can
  snark about managers these days being unable to read anything that
  doesn't look like a bullet point, but there are advantage to these
  infodecks.

- You can use spatial layout to help explanation
- They discourage long prose that people don't read
- It's easy to include diagrams as primary elements in the
    communication


All this can lead to a document that's more approachable and
  easier to communicate information than a traditional prose text
  would be.


For a list of infodecks on martinfowler.com, see the
  [infodecks tag](https://martinfowler.com/tags/infodecks.html).


If a deck is intended for reading and not for projection,
  then I don't count it as a slideument. Slideuments are bad because
  they try to do two different things, but an infodeck is there only
  for reading, so can be done well. Often, of course, they aren't but
  that's a problem in the execution rather than the fundamental concept.


Infodecks are an interesting form to me, if only because it
  seems nobody takes them seriously. Most users look at them as something
  they just knock up with PowerPoint, and writers with pretentions to
  seriousness (such as myself) consider infodecks to be beneath us. I'm beginning to
  think we should take them more seriously. We should think and talk
  more about how to make them effective as communication vehicles.1


1: [Mike Roberts](http://mikebroberts.com)
      pointed me to an interesting example of an infodeck in fiction,
      one of the chapters of Jennifer Egan's [
      A Visit from the Goon Squad](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0307477479/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0307477479&linkCode=as2&tag=martinfowlerc-20). It won a Pullitzer Prize,
      which I think is more than any of my infodecks will ever do. [The powerpoint
      chapter](http://jenniferegan.com/books) is available online, it makes sense on its own.
      The book's chapters are short stories linked
      through common characters.


One reason that these are likely to grow is that increasingly we
  are communicating on computer devices and not using paper. Modern
  computers have bright multi-color screens, and aren't worried about
  conserving paper. So a colorful, diagram-heavy approach that uses
  lots of virtual pages is an effective form of document - especially
  as tablets become more prevalent.


So over the last year or so I've begun exploring using infodecks
  as first-class forms of communication. You can see a couple that I've produced so far

- [An introduction to NoSQL](https://martinfowler.com/articles/nosql-intro), which is a PDF
- [Developing software for multiple mobile devices](https://martinfowler.com/articles/multiMobile), which is HTML


Using just a couple of examples is only enough to make tentative
  conclusions, but is enough to make me want to continue exploring
  this medium. Both of these infodecks are relatively high-level,
  non-technical pieces, indeed I visualized one of our senior sales
  managers as part of my target audience.  Infodecks naturally seem to
  fit to this kind of audience, but I want to also try them for
  something more technical in the future.


I think PDF works best for most people, since often these will be
  emailed around. I used Apple's Pages application for the NoSQL
  infodeck, and I think a page-layout program is a better fit for the
  form that a presentation program such as PowerPoint or Keynote.


For my purposes, however, HTML is a better fit. I write mostly
  for this website, and HTML is the language of the web. Also with
  HTML I have the option to use dynamic elements, such as animation,
  which isn't possible with PDF. The downside is the lack of tools.
  There are tools out there to do HTML slideshows, but they are mostly
  aimed at live presentation tools using the [Bullet-Riddled
  Corpse anti-pattern](http://www.informit.com/articles/article.aspx?p=1961953). Infodecks have different needs to live
  presentations and even though bulleted sentences are less of a
  problem for infodecks, I want to use many other techniques.


However it does make sense to use existing HTML based tools as a
  base. For the multi-mobile deck  I originally used [deck.js](http://imakewebthings.com/deck.js/) which combines a
  good set of basic slide functionality with a nicely extensible
  architecture. For later decks I explored adding animation using
  animation [extensions to deck.js
  ](http://home.heeere.com/tech-deckjs-ext.html)done by Rémi Emonet. Rémi was extremely helpful at sorting out various
  niggles that are particular to my rather odd usage. However I hit an
  impassable road-block - deck,js, like most HTML-based presentation
  tools, loads the whole slide deck into memory. While this makes
  sense for live presentations, it sadly crashes devices - such as my
  iPad 1 - with the decks I was working on.


As a result I had to write my own javascript platform for hosting
  the decks. This just loads a few slides at a time, so trades
  resonsiveness for less memory usage.


I don't ever like writing HTML directly, so I compose the deck
  using my usual approach - a custom XML vocabulary that I transform
  into HTML using an extension of [my usual transformation
  toolchain](https://github.com/martinfowler/mfweb).


As well as working on the toolchain, I'm also working on the
  compositional style to use for infodecks. So far a core element is
  having a lede-and-details approach to the text. Most slides have a
  lede, a single sentence in a large font that summarizes the
  narrative. More details appear in text blocks. The idea is that the
  reader can get a good sense of the what the deck says by skipping
  through the slides just reading the ledes. When they want more
  detail they can read the more detailed text. The limited feedback
  I've gathered so far seems to support that this is working as I intended.


The detail paragraphs are link bullets, but can be longer than
  what people put in live decks. I think of them as short paragraphs
  rather than bulleted sentences.


Diagrams are key to making the infodeck style work. For the HTML
  toolchain, I've been focusing on using SVG. I did this partly
  because this way everything scales nicely, but also because I can
  take advantage of the fact the SVG objects are DOM objects that I
  can manipulate through css and javascript.


(I originally posted the first edition of this entry on
  December 19th, 2011. I've updated it with my recent thoughts on building Infodecks.)


## Notes


1: [Mike Roberts](http://mikebroberts.com)
      pointed me to an interesting example of an infodeck in fiction,
      one of the chapters of Jennifer Egan's [
      A Visit from the Goon Squad](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0307477479/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0307477479&linkCode=as2&tag=martinfowlerc-20). It won a Pullitzer Prize,
      which I think is more than any of my infodecks will ever do. [The powerpoint
      chapter](http://jenniferegan.com/books) is available online, it makes sense on its own.
      The book's chapters are short stories linked
      through common characters.
