---
title: "Nexus7"
description: "A few months ago, I bought aGoogle   Nexus 7 tablet. I like to wait until I've used a device for   a while before I post my experiences of it, but the disadvantage of   that policy is that now the tab"
date: 2013-10-08T00:00:00
tags: ["gadgets"]
url: https://martinfowler.com/bliki/Nexus7.html
slug: Nexus7
word_count: 569
---


A few months ago, I bought a [ Google
  Nexus 7 tablet](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00DVFLJDS/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=B00DVFLJDS&linkCode=as2&tag=martinfowlerc-20). I like to wait until I've used a device for
  a while before I post my experiences of it, but the disadvantage of
  that policy is that now the tablet I'm talking about has been
  superseded. That said, I'll pass on my comments anyway, since they
  may still be helpful to others considering their future tablet
  options.


My driver for getting this device was two-fold. I got an Apple
  [iPad](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/iPad.html) just a couple of months after it first appeared.
  It's been a constant companion, but its age is showing. It's not
  just that it cannot run anything newer than IOS 5 (that's not a big
  deal to me), the major problem is that many websites will crash the browser
  these days (which I gather is due to memory limits). The second
  rationale was experimentation, I wanted to try Android 1 and also try the smaller 7” tablet form factor.


1: 
      I first got an Android device at the Google IO conference in
      2009 (where Rebecca and I [spoke
      about cloud computing](http://www.google.com/events/io/2009/sessions/ThoughtworksAppEngineJava.html)). This was what's since been called
      the [Google
      Ion](http://reviews.cnet.com/smartphones/google-ion-htc-magic/4505-6452_7-33665904.html). I enjoyed having a smart phone and the experience
      led me to upgrade my phone account to handle 3G - but the only
      way to do that was to get an iPhone, so that was the end of that
      Android experience.


On the whole I really like the nexus 7. The base Google UI
  is a touch better than Apple's. I miss the
  cross-application back button when I go back to the iPad. I also
  prefer Android's approach to completion in typing where they give
  you three words to choose from and don't automatically complete with
  the space bar (which regularly annoys me with IOS).


My feelings are more mixed about the 7” tablet size. I find that
  most of the time I mildly prefer the 7” due to its smaller size and lighter
  weight. However some of the time I strongly prefer the 10” size
  because of the bigger screen. There are times - some websites, pdf
  documents, or books with code or graphics - when that bigger screen
  is essential. The consequence of this is that despite the advantages
  of the smaller size I end up taking the 10” device on my travels for
  those occasions where I need the larger screen. If I could only have
  one tablet, it would have to be a 10”, but I do use the 7” more
  often at home.


The other downside to Android lies in the applications. There are
  some nice applications for IOS that I can't find alternatives I like
  on the Android. To be fair this could be due to familiarity and a
  need to spend a bit more time searching. I need to put more effort
  into checking out what's available before I decide whether to use
  Apple or Android when I buy a 10” device to replace my iPad.


## Notes


1: 
      I first got an Android device at the Google IO conference in
      2009 (where Rebecca and I [spoke
      about cloud computing](http://www.google.com/events/io/2009/sessions/ThoughtworksAppEngineJava.html)). This was what's since been called
      the [Google
      Ion](http://reviews.cnet.com/smartphones/google-ion-htc-magic/4505-6452_7-33665904.html). I enjoyed having a smart phone and the experience
      led me to upgrade my phone account to handle 3G - but the only
      way to do that was to get an iPhone, so that was the end of that
      Android experience.
