---
title: "Shu Ha Ri"
description: "Shu-Ha-Ri is a way of thinking about how you learn a   technique. The name comes from Japanese martial arts (particularly Aikido), andAlistair Cockburnintroduced it as a way of thinking about learning"
date: 2014-08-22T00:00:00
tags: ["agile adoption", "dictionary", "process theory"]
url: https://martinfowler.com/bliki/ShuHaRi.html
slug: ShuHaRi
word_count: 298
---


Shu-Ha-Ri is a way of thinking about how you learn a
  technique. The name comes from Japanese martial arts (particularly Aikido), and [Alistair Cockburn](http://alistair.cockburn.us)
  introduced it as a way of thinking about learning techniques and
  methodologies for software development.


The idea is that a person passes through three stages of gaining
  knowledge:

- **Shu:** In this beginning stage students follow the teachings
    of one master precisely. They concentrate on how to do the task,
    without worrying too much about the underlying theory. If there
    are multiple variations on how to do the task, they concentrate on
    just the one way their master teaches them.
- **Ha:** At this point students begin to branch out. With the
    basic practices working they now start to learn the underlying
    principles and theory behind the technique. They also start
    learning from other masters and integrates that learning into his practice.
- **Ri:** Now the students aren't learning from other people, but from
    their own practice. They create their own approaches and adapts what
    they've learned to their own particular circumstances.


The fundamental idea here is that when teaching a concept, you
  have to tailor the style of teaching to where the learner is in
  their understanding and that progression follows a common pattern.
  Early stages of learning focus on concrete steps to imitate, the
  focus then shifts to understanding principles and finally into
  self-directed innovation.


There are other expressions of this style of learning. A more
  nuanced approach is the [Dreyfus
  model](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dreyfus_model_of_skill_acquisition). I rather like Clark Terry's formulation of this model: [Imitate,
  Assimilate, Innovate](http://jazzadvice.com/clark-terrys-3-steps-to-learning-improvisation/).


## Further Reading


You can find Alistair's (better) description of this in his book:
  [Agile
  Software Development](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0201699699/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0201699699&linkCode=as2&tag=martinfowlerc-20).


## Revisions


Originally posted 30 Sep 2006, updated to include the
      generalization and mention of similar models on 22 Aug 2014
