---
title: "What do you mean by “Event-Driven”?"
description: "Towards the end of last year I attended a workshop with my colleagues in     Thoughtworks to discuss the nature of “event-driven” applications. Over the last few     years we've been building lots of "
date: 2017-02-07T00:00:00
tags: ["design", "event architectures"]
url: https://martinfowler.com/articles/201701-event-driven.html
slug: 201701-event-driven
word_count: 1642
---


Towards the end of last year I attended a workshop with my colleagues in
    Thoughtworks to discuss the nature of “event-driven” applications. Over the last few
    years we've been building lots of systems that make a lot of use of events, and
    they've been often praised, and often damned. Our North American office organized a
    summit, and Thoughtworks senior developers from all over the world showed up to share
    ideas.


The biggest outcome of the summit was recognizing that when people talk about
    “events”, they actually mean some quite different things. So we spent a lot of time
    trying to tease out what some useful patterns might be. This note is a brief summary
    of the main ones we identified.


## Event Notification


This happens when a system sends event messages to notify other systems of a
      change in its domain. A key element of event notification is that the source system
      doesn't really care much about the response. Often it doesn't expect any answer at
      all, or if there is a response that the source does care about, it's indirect. There
      would be a marked separation between the logic flow that sends the event and any
      logic flow that responds to some reaction to that event.


Event notification is nice because it implies a low level of coupling, and is
      pretty simple to set up. It can become problematic, however, if there really is a
      logical flow that runs over various event notifications. The problem is that it can
      be hard to see such a flow as it's not explicit in any program text. Often the only
      way to figure out this flow is from monitoring a live system. This can make it hard
      to debug and modify such a flow. The danger is that it's very easy to make nicely
      decoupled systems with event notification, without realizing that you're losing
      sight of that larger-scale flow, and thus set yourself up for trouble in future
      years. The pattern is still very useful, but you have to be careful of the trap.


A simple example of this trap is when an event is used as a passive-aggressive
      command. This happens when the source system expects the recipient to carry out an
      action, and ought to use a command message to show that intention, but styles the
      message as an event instead.


An event need not carry much data on it, often just some id information and a
      link back to the sender that can be queried for more information. The receiver knows
      something has changed, may get some minimal information on the nature of the change,
      but then issues a request back to the sender to decide what to do next.


## Event-Carried State Transfer


This pattern shows up when you want to update clients of a system in such a way
      that they don't need to contact the source system in order to do further work. A
      customer management system might fire off events whenever a customer changes their
      details (such as an address) with events that contain details of the data that
      changed. A recipient can then update it's own copy of customer data with the
      changes, so that it never needs to talk to the main customer system in order to do
      its work in the future.


An obvious down-side of this pattern is that there's lots of data schlepped
      around and lots of copies. But that's less of a problem in an age of abundant
      storage. What we gain is greater resilience, since the recipient systems can
      function if the customer system is becomes unavailable. We reduce latency, as
      there's no remote call required to access customer information. We don't have to
      worry about load on the customer system to satisfy queries from all the consumer
      systems. But it does involve more complexity on the receiver, since it has to sort
      out maintaining all the state, when it's usually easier just to call the sender for
      more information when needed.


## Event-Sourcing


The core idea of [event sourcing](https://martinfowler.com/eaaDev/EventSourcing.html) is that whenever we
      make a change to the state of a system, we record that state change as an event, and
      we can confidently rebuild the system state by reprocessing the events at any time
      in the future. The event store becomes the principal source of truth, and the system
      state is purely derived from it. For programmers, the best example of this is a
      version-control system. The log of all the commits is the event store and the
      working copy of the source tree is the system state.


Event-sourcing introduces a lot of issues, which I won't go into here, but I do
      want to highlight some common misconceptions. There's no need for event processing
      to be asynchronous, consider the case of updating a local git repository - that's
      entirely a synchronous operation, as is updating a centralized version-control
      system like subversion. Certainly having all these commits allows you to do all
      sorts of interesting behaviors, git is the great example, but the core commit is
      fundamentally a simple action.


Another common mistake is to assume that everyone using an event-sourced system
      should understand and access the event log to determine useful data. But knowledge
      of the event log can be limited. I'm writing this in an editor that is
      ignorant of all the commits in my source tree, it just assumes there is a file on
      the disk. Much of the processing in an event-sourced system can be based on a useful
      working copy. Only elements that really need the information in the event log should
      have to manipulate it. We can have multiple working copies with different schema, if that
      helps; but usually there should be a clear separation between domain processing and
      deriving a working copy from the event log.


When working with an event log, it is
      often useful to build snapshots of the working copy so that you don't have to
      process all the events from scratch every time you need a working copy. Indeed there
      is a duality here, we can look at the event log as either a list of changes, or as a
      list of states. We can derive one from the other. Version-control systems often mix
      snapshots and deltas in their event log in order to get the best performance. 1


1: 
      I sometimes hear people say that git isn't an example of event sourcing because it
      stores states of files and trees in `.git/objects`. But whether a system
      uses changes or snapshots for its internal storage doesn't affect whether it's event
      sourced. Git happily will summon up a list of changes for me on demand. And when it
      compresses data into packfiles, it does use a combination of snapshots and changes,
      with the mix chosen for performance reasons.


Event-sourcing has many interesting benefits, which easily come to mind when
      thinking of the value of version-control systems. The event log provides a strong
      audit capability (accounting transactions are an event source for account balances).
      We can recreate historic states by replaying the event log up to a point. We can
      explore alternative histories by injecting hypothetical events when replaying. Event
      sourcing make it plausible to have non-durable working copies, such as a [Memory Image](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/MemoryImage.html).


Event sourcing does have its problems. Replaying events becomes problematic when
      results depend on interactions with outside systems. We have to figure out how to
      deal with changes in the schema of events over time. Many people find the event
      processing adds a lot of complexity to an application (although I do wonder if
      that's more due to poor separation between components that derive a working copy and
      components that do the domain processing).


## CQRS


[Command Query Responsibility Segregation (CQRS](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/CQRS.html)) is the
      notion of having separate data structures for reading and writing information.
      Strictly CQRS isn't really about events, since you can use CQRS without any events
      present in your design. But commonly people do combine CQRS with the earlier
      patterns here, hence their presence at the summit.


The justification for CQRS is that in complex domains, a single model to handle
      both reads and writes gets too complicated, and we can simplify by separating the
      models. This is particularly appealing when you have a difference in access
      patterns, such as lots of reads and very few writes. But the gain for using CQRS has
      to be balanced against the additional complexity of having separate models. I find
      many of my colleagues are deeply wary of using CQRS, finding it often misused.


## Making sense of these patterns


As a sort of software botanist, keen to collect samples, I find this a tricky
      terrain. The core problem is confusing the different patterns. On one project the
      capable and experienced project manager told me that event sourcing had been a
      disaster - any change took twice the work to update both the read and write models.
      Just in that phrase I can detect a potential confusion between event-sourcing and
      CQRS - so how can I figure out which was culprit? The tech lead on the project
      claimed the main problem was lots of asynchronous communications, certainly a known
      complexity-booster, but not one that's a necessary part of either event-sourcing or
      CQRS. Furthermore we have to beware that all these patterns are good in the right
      place and bad when put on the wrong terrain. But it's hard to figure out what the
      right terrain is when we conflate the patterns.


I'd love to write some definitive treatise that sorts all this confusion out, and
      gives solid guidelines on how to do each pattern well, and when it should be used.
      Sadly I don't have the time to do it. I write this note in the hope it will be
      useful, but am quite aware that it falls well short of what is really needed.


---
