---
title: "Thoughts writing a Google App script"
description: "A google sheets script is a handy way to share a short   script for non-programmers."
date: 2020-10-13T00:00:00
tags: ["tools"]
url: https://martinfowler.com/articles/202009-google-app-dir.html
slug: 202009-google-app-dir
word_count: 1877
---


Recently a friend of mine asked for a simple program that would correlate
    some data drawn from a couple of online services. I decided the best way to
    do this for him would be to use a google spreadsheet as the host, putting
    the code into the spreadsheet's script area. I'm no expert in Google App
    Script, but the exercise led to a few observations, which I feel compelled to
    share.


## Google Sheets is a great platform for non-programmers


Had I been writing this script for my own purposes, I'd never consider
      using Google Sheets. I'd just write it as a command line script. But
      whenever you write a program, you have to think about how it's going to be
      deployed. In this case my friend, although quite the whizz with audio-visual
      tech, isn't a programmer who uses the command line every day. Also he uses
      windows, which isn't an environment I'm familiar with any more. (I'm told
      its command line has got better, but the bar was low enough for worms to
      jump over.) However, like
      many computer users, he uses Google Sheets all the time.


Spreadsheets get a lot of stick from us professional programmers, who
      often observe that many businesses rely on a few Excel spreadsheets. We roll
      our eyes as we say this, such spreadsheets are often a mess of complicated
      code, little modularity, untested, with no version control, sitting around
      on users computers without any management. Spreadsheets are often coerced
      into tasks that they are ill sorted for, often acting as cobbled together
      databases, tables whose relationships are a web of tangled VLOOKUPs.


But these spreadsheets are widely used for a good reason. The tabular
      metaphor is a simple yet effective way to handle structured data. By using
      [Illustrative Programming](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/IllustrativeProgramming.html), users can see results
      immediately as they work their formulae. Google Sheets makes it easy to
      share spreadsheets with other people, making it easy for several people to
      have a common place to store shared data. As someone who instinctively
      dislikes barriers based on skills, I've often felt frustrated that
      software developers don't get more involved in what other professionals
      are doing with their spreadsheets.


Like so many others, a spreadsheet makes a natural environment for my
      friend to carry out this task. Google sheets allows me to create a new menu
      and easily bind scripts to menu items, so he can easily run my scripts, see
      the data the scripts generate, and add additional data directly into a
      sheet. We can easily share a sheet so I can update the scripts or look at
      data if a problem comes up. He doesn't have to install any software on his
      machine, or keep it up to date.


Should I get run over by a bus, he can easily share the sheet with someone
      else, who can easily edit and run the sheet. Since the code is JavaScript,
      it's a widely known language for programmers to work with.


## The hardest part is authentication


The “business logic” in the scripts was very easy. Compare the list of
      members on his Slack channel to members either registered on Patreon or on
      his own separate list. Then use the comparison to generate lists of people
      to add or remove from Slack. All it needed was to pull emails from the
      lists and do a couple of set difference operations.


The hard part was getting the lists, not in the sense of fetching them
      from a REST URL (which again is easy), but in satisfying the service that
      the script is authorized to get this data. Both services use OAuth to sort
      out authentication, but that standard is no indication that its a plug and
      play exercise, even with the library that Google App scripts provides.


In the end I ended up half-avoiding and entirely-avoiding
      authentication. Slack has a nice mechanism by which you can create an app
      to access the Slack data, give it the authorizations you need, and it
      gives you a simple access token on its website. For this application I
      could just put that access token into the script. Usually that's poor
      security practice, but in this case the script is in the same spreadsheet
      as the data it downloads (and that data isn't dreadfully sensitive). That
      side-stepped most of the complexity that OAuth presented.


The Patreon data was both more awkward to authenticate and more
      sensitive data. So here I did an end-run around the authentication. The
      Patreon web-app allows the user to download data into a CSV file. So I ask
      my friend to do that and import the data into the spreadsheet.


There is a real opportunity here for Google to simplify the whole authentication
      flow. I should be able to just call a fetch method on a remote service,
      and have the infrastructure sort out the authentication flows without me
      having to investigate and program them myself.


## Google's documentation is non-zero


That's about the best thing I can say about it. There is a list of all
      the classes and their methods. By reading through them I could usually
      figure something out. But there's not much other than that, and even a
      simple task like this led me into more awkward spots than I would like.


## Organizing the spreadsheet


I don't program with spreadsheets much (I do general data munging and graph
      plotting in R) so I'm not experienced enough to have strong opinions on what a
      well structured spreadsheet looks like. There may be advice somewhere on how
      to design your spreadsheets well, but I couldn't find it (if anyone knows any
      good articles, do let me know).


Given that lack, I went with my usual instincts. First instinct is to
      download data to a local store with minimal manipulation. So my script to
      download data from slack did no more than select the fields I wanted and
      dumped them into one page of the spreadsheet. Similarly my page of Patreon
      data assumes a simple upload of the CSV file from Patreon. Both of these pages
      are built to clear and replace the whole page when they are refreshed. A third
      page just contained the hand-maintained list of exceptions. All three of these
      sheets are pure data sheets, a single table, headings in row 1, no
      formulae. The comparison
      script reads from these three data sheets, does the (simple) application
      logic and emits the two lists to a separate output sheet.


That's very much how I'd use separate text files in a command line app. It
      allows the user to see the raw downloaded data. I can run (and test) the
      application logic without downloading each time. I could set up a sheet with
      test data. There is a clear one-way flow of data between the sheets and code.


## Don't use appendRow to append rows


The first time I ran the code to download from slack was depressing, as it
      ran horribly slowly. There may have only been a thousand or so rows, but they
      were added to the spreadsheet at the rate of about one a second. We could put up
      with that, but it wasn't very good. I was convinced there must be a quicker
      way to do this.


Hunting around the API, I saw that a lot of spreadsheet operations depend
      on defining a range in the spreadsheet. I was adding a new row using
      `Sheet.appendRow`, but if I defined a range (which could be whole sheet), I
      could use `Range.setValues` instead. Once I did, adding the rows was
      effectively instantaneous. I did not find any hints in the documentation or
      elsewhere on the web to try this, which is important as the lack of this kind
      of documentation is barrier to people using this platform more widely.


## Allow API lookups to look up multiple values


As I mentioned above, I ended up not using the REST interface for the
      Patreon data due to the complications around authentication. But there was
      another reason to favor the CSV download. The Patreon API included a resource
      that would tell me all the people who were supporters of a campaign, for these
      people it would give me their Patreon ID and their name. But to cross-check
      with the slack list, I also needed their email. That I could look up by
      getting a resource indexed by ID. However I'd need to do that for several hundred
      people, and I'd need a separate GET for each one.


The message to API designers is this. If you provide the ability to lookup
      information about a resource by ID, support the ability to provide data for
      multiple IDs at once. 1


1: 
       It may be there's a way to do it, but I didn't find it before I decided to go the CSV route instead.


## I like separating application logic from spreadsheet IO


The way to access data from the spreadsheet is to use the column and
      row conventions of the spreadsheet (eg cell “B22” or range “A2:E412”).
      That makes sense for many scripting tasks, as the programmers are thinking
      of the problem in terms of manipulating cells in the spreadsheet.


I tend to think of things rather differently, preferring my data in the
      form of basic JavaScript data structures, particularly since I can then
      use JavaScript's [collection pipeline](https://martinfowler.com/articles/collection-pipeline/)
      operators on them.


Given that, this was a handy function I wrote to extract data from a
      sheet, and return it as an array of JavaScript objects.


```
extractData(sheetName, firstCol, lastCol, mapper) {
  const sheet = SpreadsheetApp.getActiveSpreadsheet().getSheetByName(sheetName)
  const numRows = sheet.getLastRow()
  const range = `${firstCol}1:${lastCol}${numRows}`
  return sheet.getRange(range).getValues().map(mapper)
}
```


I could then use it with code like this:


```
const mapper = row => ({email: row[3], name: row[0], slackId: row[1]})
slackData = this.extractData("raw-slack-download", "A", "D", mapper)

```


Once I'd got it into arrays, figuring out the results was easy,
      although I had to write a simple `Array.difference` function as I didn't
      have access to [lodash](https://lodash.com).


## The development environment is understandably crude


To write the JavaScript, I just pick a menu item in the spreadsheet and
      type into a crude text editor. It's not the comfortable home that I'm
      accustomed to, but it's fine for an overnight stay.


If I were doing something more sophisticated, I'd investigate setting
      up a better environment. One possibility would be to see if I can edit the
      script using Emacs's awesome Tramp mode (which allows editing remote files
      as if they are local ones.) Better still would be a way to sync local
      files with the google drive, allowing me to keep the source code in a git
      repo. But for a simple task such as this, about 150 lines-of-code, it
      wasn't worth looking into seeing if this was possible.


## Summing Up


Hosting a simple application on a Google spreadsheet is an appealing
      deployment platform for a range of simple tasks. It allows users to run
      code without having to install something on their machine, to enter data
      in a familiar environment, and support easy sharing with colleagues. It's
      not a platform I hear much discussion about, but it's one to keep in mind.
      In particular, for any task that would be a simple shell script,
      but your users aren't comfortable with console windows and text files.


---
