---
title: "How I use Twitter"
description: "The things I do to make Twitter useful and avoid the time-traps"
date: 2022-04-26T00:00:00
tags: ["writing", "internet culture", "tools"]
url: https://martinfowler.com/articles/2022-use-twitter.html
slug: 2022-use-twitter
word_count: 856
---


A couple of recent conversations about Twitter were nudging me into writing
    about how I use Twitter even before The Muskover developed. Twitter has
    become an important part of my online life, and my online life is a big part
    of what I do. But like any tool, Twitter can be used in many different ways,
    and how you use it affects how useful it can be.


As a platform, Twitter's strength is its small character
    limit. It forces people to be brief, although threads somewhat
    undermines that constraint. Small posts are quick to skim, so I don't waste
    much time if there isn't much there.


Small posts aren't good for conversations, but that's ok with me since one
    of the big lessons I learned about the internet in the 90's was that
    conversations online were rarely worthwhile. 90's newsgroups had all the
    toxic behavior we see on online platforms now, for much the same reasons.
    Twitter makes it easy for me to avoid them if I don't bother reading (or making)
    replies.


(I say this as someone who is lucky not to be the target of online
    bullies. Twitter has long-lacked the tools to prevent harassment - I'd say
    that is Twitter's biggest failing. It's easy for me to underweight the
    importance of a problem I don't have to deal with, but I know good people
    who avoid online spaces entirely because of a fear of harassment, often a
    fear born of bitter experience.)


Where I find Twitter most useful is that it allows me to precisely follow
    individual accounts who tweet things I like to hear about. So I'm very careful
    with who I follow. Some people tweet a lot of good stuff, but too much -
    those I don't follow reckoning that anything particularly good will be
    retweeted by those that I do follow. What I mostly like is announcements of
    interesting articles, which I can then save in my Instapaper feed to read
    later. A good short thread is also useful, but I'm wary of those since they
    can easily spiral out - and are more trouble to save. During the pandemic,
    I've found curating a list of reliable twitter accounts has been hugely helpful
    in understanding what's going on. Similarly I've recently started following some
    handy feeds to keep up with events in Ukraine. 1


1: 
      I made a [couple of
      these lists public](https://twitter.com/martinfowler/lists) For those who might find them handy.


As a writer I mostly post links to articles that I think those who follow
    me would enjoy, either on martinfowler.com or elsewhere. I try to avoid
    getting into arguments, and am mostly successful at that. (I strongly
    recommend following [Charles' Rules of
    Argument](https://fishbowl.pastiche.org/2004/03/21/charles_rules_of_argument).) I find it harder to resist attempting catchy soundbites.
    2


2: A quick classification of my last 50 tweets (over
    48 days) had 36 as pointers to articles or threads of interest, 6
    announcements of events I'm involved in, and 8 attempts at a catchy quote.
    In that same time I made 28 replies, none of which were
    conversations.


If Twitter were to ask me which part of their product they should improve, I'd
    ask for more attention to lists. I find lists really handy because I can pop
    people who mostly tweet on a topic into a list that I'll read when I'm ready
    to spend time on that topic. I keep an eye on the people I follow during the
    day, but have a few lists that I catch up during the evening. While they
    work well, I'm irritated that lists don't collapse threads the way they are
    collapsed in my main feed. I'm also frustrated by the lack of tools to
    manage my lists. I'd like a way to move all of my follows into lists and
    then set some lists up so that I automatically follow anyone on that list.


I only set my following to chronological order. I used to have to reset
    Twitter to not use its algorithm on me every few weeks, but thankfully
    they've let it alone for many months now. I never look at “explore” or “top
    articles” and very rarely look at hashtags. I rarely use DMs, as I prefer to
    route my communications into email where I can keep track of things more
    easily. I use the default web interface on my real computer and the app on
    my iPhone/Pad. I haven't found a third-party site or app that's done enough
    to make me want to use it over Twitter's default offering.


I'm not a fan of Musk's public interactions, but it's too early to judge
    what effect the takeover will have on Twitter. From what he says, he seems
    to be naive about the problems of online content moderation 3. I'll continue as I have for now and see how things develop. As
    ever, I'm happy that I have my own internet domain.


3: 
      I regularly listen to [Arbiters of Truth](https://www.lawfareblog.com/topic/arbiters-truth),
      which explores many interesting aspects of content management and online
      information. This has helped me understand the limits of free-speech
      absolutism. As an introduction, it's worth reading Evelyn Douek's recent
      [Atlantic article](https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2022/04/elon-musk-twitter-free-speech/629673/).


---
