---
title: "My 2024 thoughts on the state of social media"
description: "I see a continued fragmentation of social media as people   leave X(Twitter)."
date: 2024-11-13T00:00:00
tags: ["internet culture"]
url: https://martinfowler.com/articles/2024-social-media.html
slug: 2024-social-media
word_count: 1624
---


It's the time of year where I'm reflecting on the state of social media
    and my use of it. Two years ago, The Muskover occurred 1, and since then activity that used to be concentrated there
    has is now scattered across several social media networks. My reading and
    posting to social media has reflected that change.


1: Elon Musk's takeover of Twitter


## How I use Social Media


Different people use social media in different ways, and my thoughts
      are governed by how I use them. If you have different interactions with
      social media, you won't find my analysis lines up with what you
      experience, although I hope you'll still find my perspective interesting.


I'm not really a *social* user of social media. I first started using
      social media (in some form) in the late 1980's with Usenet. I learned
      quickly that I disliked the often-heated arguments that blew up there, and
      so I avoided reading them and, above all, avoided getting into them.


To find my social media pages, use the icons in the site banner, or
      look at the [list on my recent changes page](https://martinfowler.com/recent-changes.html).


When it comes to reading, I prefer to follow a fixed feed of accounts
      that I explicitly follow, trying hard to avoid any kind of system
      suggested feed. I curate my feeds to read people who say interesting
      things, and don't post so much that I can't keep up. The most valuable
      things they post are links to articles (or occasionally videos) that have
      some thoughtful depth. Following a fixed list does mean I miss a lot of
      promising stuff, but I only have so many hours, and anything really good
      usually gets picked up by the people I do follow.


When it comes to posting, my main use to is announce new articles that
      I post, and other interesting stuff that I think my readers may be
      interested in. I try not to post too often, as I presumptuously assume
      that my readers share my dislike of over-active posters. I consider any
      post I make on social media to be ephemeral - anything I write that's
      meant to be long-lasting I keep on this site.


## Bluesky


I will start posting new article announcements to [my Bluesky account](https://bsky.app/profile/martinfowler.com).


Bluesky has seen a steady rise over the last couple of years. I created
      an account on there a while ago, but haven't posted much so far. I used it
      mainly to read a few folks that migrated there from Twitter. Mostly these
      people were in the current affairs or boardgaming world, but recently
      there's been a significant uptick in tech people posting there.
      Consequently I'm inclined to post there more as well, and have added it
      to the [growing list](https://martinfowler.com/recent-changes.html) of social networks
      that I'll be posting site updates to.


One of the things I like about Bluesky is its use of an open protocol,
      which reduces the chances that it will follow the fate that befell
      Twitter. I've set my domain for Bluesky, so hopefully even if bad things
      happen to Bluesky itself, the AT protocol will live on.


## X (Twitter)


Predictions of its demise, either technologically or financially, have
      not come to pass - but that hasn't stopped its decline in importance. Any
      social media network depends on who is posting there, and many people have
      moved away from Twitter, either not posting there at all, or posting on
      other sites in addition. I'm in that second camp, if you're interested in
      my posts, you can find essentially the same posts on [many places](https://martinfowler.com/recent-changes.html), so only need to follow me on one
      of them (or deal with duplicates).


If I find someone doing what I'm doing - posting on Twitter and on
      other sites - I prefer to follow them on a different site. As far as
      I'm concerned, Twitter is in decline, and although I'm not leaving it for
      the moment, I prefer to follow activity in other places.


Twitter isn't dead, but declines as people leave


I will continue to post updates there, at least for a while. I have
      many followers there, and I believe that my readers should have the choice
      of where to follow me, constrained by my enthusiasm in posting to so many
      social networks. But if you do follow me there, and also use one of the
      other sites I post to, I do encourage you to change to follow me on
      another network.


## LinkedIn


I long avoided LinkedIn, as its whole ethos of avid connection-making was
      thoroughly unappealing. But it's also grown in importance for social media
      posting, and many of my colleagues remarked that it had replaced Twitter
      for them. I thus joined LinkedIn in March this year. As I write this I'm
      up to just under 100,000 followers, less than the 350,000 I have on
      Twitter, but still a significant reach for my publication announcements.


LinkedIn is annoyingly corporate, but I see the most tech
      activity there


It's not a place I enjoy, however. I have little control over my feed,
      and my notifications are full of “someone liked your post” events. I don't
      pay any attention to those, but do want to see notifications when folks mention my work or
      comment on my posts. This problem exists on other sites too, but the
      user experience is worse on LinkedIn. The feed also has lots of professional
      puffery, which lowers the signal-to-noise ratio, and a distinctly
      corporate personality.


Despite all that, I've noticed that I'm getting more reactions to my
      article announcements on LinkedIn that anywhere else, which is an
      indication that more readers are finding out about articles there than on
      the other sites. So for letting people know about new material, LinkedIn is
      currently the best place for me.


If you do want to follow my posts on LinkedIn, use the “follow”
      feature. I'm still as averse to “connections” as ever, and only use it
      with a few people that I've worked with a lot, and those that have written
      articles for the site.


## Fediverse (Mastodon)


When The Muskover happened, many people saw the Fediverse as the
      natural successor to Twitter. It's federated nature meant that there
      wouldn't be a single owner that would take over the network, giving it a
      greater resiliency to the future. I felt there was a good chance that we'd
      see [organizations hosting Fediverse nodes](https://martinfowler.com/articles/your-org-run-mastodon.html), allowing an organization to
      control its own social presence. My colleagues at Thoughtworks had set up
      such an example.


But it seems that much of that promise hasn't come to pass, probably
      because too many people found that choosing a server was too awkward, and
      that the advantages of federation were outweighed by the complexities of
      its usage. Bluesky is more approachable, and although it's a
      commercial organization, it is building on an open protocol that has a
      similar prospect of resilience.


The Fediverse hasn't gained much traction


A few tech people moved to Fediverse, and I'm happy to post and follow
      there at the moment. I don't have follower statistics for it, but I get
      much less response to announcements than I do on Twitter or LinkedIn. If
      it wasn't for its open nature, I'd probably wind down posting there, as
      it's not worth the trouble, but because it's open I'll continue posting
      for the foreseeable future.


## RSS


This isn't really a social media, as there isn't a mechanism for discussion,
      but since I'm mostly into social media to find out about interesting
      publications, RSS fits into my discussion. There are many
      interesting folks that have RSS feeds, sometimes using services like Medium or
      Substack. I've been posting my new material on my RSS feed for a long
      time, and will continue to use it for posting and following.


## Threads


Threads got a lot of attention due to its rapid take-up, but I haven't
      been involved. I don't really want to put time into another big-tech
      social network unless it demonstrates its importance in the way that
      LinkedIn has.


## Facebook


I stopped posting there many years ago. I still have an account, and
      pop in occasionally, but I see a feed that seems almost entirely adverts,
      and the people I do follow have their posts mixed up by an algorithm that
      is determined to think it knows better than I do what I want to read. A
      decade ago, I enjoyed it for personal contact, but now I only pop in every
      few months and am never encouraged to return.


## Board Game Geek


This is a niche network, for those like me who are over-enthused by the
      world of hobby board games. I've been [posting more there](https://boardgamegeek.com/blog/13064/martins-7th-decade) in the last year,
      sharing my opinions on the many board games I get to try out. It's a great
      resource for such enthusiasts, but not something of any interest to most
      people. It is, however, an interesting example of a social network
      designed for a particular activity, one
      that continues to prosper, doing a great job of serving its users.


## Discord and Slack


I'm lurking in a number of groups using Discord or Slack to host
      conversations, and these are smaller groups where I'm more inclined to
      chat. Most of these are about board gaming, as I find them a good way to
      unwind in the evening nattering about something that is fun, while I don't
      want the distraction of such chatter in my work context.


## Final Thoughts


All in all, social media is a very dispersed medium, which means there
      are annoyingly many places to monitor. Looking forward, I'm hoping that
      open protocols will gain more traction, so I've not given up on the
      Fediverse and am encouraged by the progress of Bluesky.


---
