---
title: "I've been kidnapped by Robert Caro"
description: "His books are huge, but I can't put them   down."
date: 2025-03-30T00:00:00
tags: ["diversions"]
url: https://martinfowler.com/articles/2025-caro.html
slug: 2025-caro
word_count: 680
---


I've always enjoyed reading, and for most of my life I've particularly
    enjoyed reading history. My wife is a structural engineer (well “was”, as
    she's now retired) and long urged me to read one of her favorite books: [The Power Broker](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0394720245/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0394720245&linkCode=as2&tag=martinfowlerc-20), by Robert Caro. I'd heard great
    things about this book from other sources too, so was certainly inclined to.
    The problem was that it is a huge book, over 1200 pages, and I didn't want
    to lug it around in my carry-on baggage - and it wasn't available in
    electronic form.


He's a highly regarded writer, so I might try something else, but his
    other work is a biography of [Lyndon Johnson](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lyndon_B._Johnson). Not one book, however, but four
    huge volumes - and he's only got up to 1964. Now Lyndon Johnson is a
    fascinating character, and I'd like to read more about him, but nobody is
    worth four-plus volumes.


Then, last fall, The Power Broker because available electronically, so I
    finally decided to get to reading it, further encouraged by a wonderful [series of podcasts on 99%
    invisible](https://99percentinvisible.org/club/).


The Power Broker is a biography of [Robert Moses](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_Moses). Most readers are
    probably wondering who that is. Robert Moses was one of the
    most powerful officials in New York for four decades. While he never won any
    elected office, he had more power, and often access to more money, than
    either New York City's mayor or New York State's governor. He used this
    power to build highways, parks, bridges, and buildings - in the process
    displacing hundreds of thousands of people from their homes. His impact on
    New York is still apparent decades after he lost power in the 1960's 
    as it shaped the physical structure of the city to this day.


So Caro's book is interesting because it describes an otherwise
    little-known but highly influential figure. Further than that, the book is
    wonderful because it is so well written. I'm a professional writer of
    non-fiction, but reading this book reminds me how far I have yet to
    advance to consider myself anywhere close to mastery of my profession. Many
    times, I've had to stop after reading a section, just so I can catch my
    breath and fully admire the prose I've just read. He can take the arcane
    maneuverings of 1920's New York legislature and make it a page-turner. He
    has a superb knack of putting the reader into the story, making me feel how
    Moses's actions affected the lives of the people whose communities were lost
    to build those highways.


It was the best book I've read for many years.


So now the prospect of four volumes of Lyndon Johnson no longer filled me
    with apprehension. I dove right in. As I write this I'm half way through,
    and the quality of the writing hasn't stopped. The [first book](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0679729453/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0679729453&linkCode=as2&tag=martinfowlerc-20) has memorable passages describing “the
    trap” that the Texas Hill Country set for its early settlers, the struggles
    for farmers working that land before Johnson's efforts brought them
    electricity, the way Johnson bullied those who worked for him, and how
    he flattered those men more powerful than him.


Caro's reputation is built on the detailed research he and his wife do
    into these books. Many people had told stories on Johnson's early life, but
    the Caros went out and seemingly interviewed every living person who knew
    Johnson. These interviews revealed the true story behind these stories,
    making Johnson less benevolent, but even more fascinating. The [second volume](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/067973371X/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=067973371X&linkCode=as2&tag=martinfowlerc-20) is forged from this kind of research,
    as the Caros realized that the story of Johnson's 1948 senate race was even
    more thrilling than a victory margin of 87 votes out of 988,295 might
    suggest. And like The Power Broker included a jaw-droppingly good
    mini-biography of New York governor Al Smith, this book painted an
    enthralling biography of Texas governor Coke Stevenson. It kept me up late
    several nights as I couldn't stop myself from just one more section.


Reviewers I've read say the next in the series, [Master of the Senate](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0394720954/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0394720954&linkCode=as2&tag=martinfowlerc-20), is the best volume. I can't
    wait to get started.


---
