---
title: "How to ignore your family on Thanksgiving"
date: 2014-11-27
url: https://mathbabe.org/2014/11/27/how-to-ignore-your-family-on-thanksgiving/
word_count: 497
---


There has been lots of advice lately on how to have a civil conversation at Thanksgiving – NPR ran a piece yesterday on “topics both Democrats and Republicans enjoy”, for example, which made me slightly annoyed and amused – perhaps because I am neither – and inspired this somewhat alternative list of ways to enjoy or otherwise ignore your family today.

- Football, obviously. Few people actually know the rules of this game, never mind the names of the various positions of the players on the field. I personally have been watching football for more than 20 years and I still really don’t know what a tackle or a tight end is, nor exactly how to recognize a blitz. No matter, that’s not the point. The point is to choose a team and root for them blindly. Ignore the long-term brain damage.
- If you don’t like football, may I suggest [An Idiot Abroad](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/An_Idiot_Abroad), a ridiculous travel show from Britain created by Ricky Gervais. It’s embarrassing and awkward, *obv*, so relative to those situations dinner with your family will seem seamless and well-meaning. I say this even though The Office, also developed by Ricky Gervais, was on NPR’s list. Also, having a The Office marathon is really not a bad idea either.
- Drinking. Adults can go for beer and spiked eggnog, but kids can get totally spaced out with just the normal eggnog. I’ve seen it before, it has a crazy high, especially if you add nutmeg. Buy tons.
- The above suggestions should keep you busy up to and including the beginning of dinner. *Be sure you don’t actually talk before dinner*, because then you’d run out of things to say during the eating part.
- For the actual dinner conversation, may I suggest keeping things light. For example, I plan to provoke a fun-loving conversation on who thinks the Ferguson grand jury’s lack of indictment serves justice and who thinks it exposes a broken system. It comes down to who trusts the system and who the system works for.
- If that seems awkward, move on to white privilege in general. If there’s a denier at the table, throw out some data: [black teenagers are 21 times more likely to be killed by a cop than white teenagers](http://thinkprogress.org/justice/2014/10/10/3578877/black-teens-were-21-times-more-likely-to-be-shot-dead-by-the-cops-reported-deaths-suggest/), for example, or if that seems hyperbolic, move on to the social mobility matrices for blacks versus whites in [Figures 8 and 9 of the appendix of this paper](http://www.bostonfed.org/inequality2014/papers/reeves-sawhill.pdf). Nice and aggregate. I plan to use a projector.
- Hahaha, just kidding! We don’t want to scare the kids. Instead, we’ll stick to the usual, where we enormously overconsume and simultaneously discuss upcoming diet plans, and/or vivaciously and competitively plan our impending holiday shopping whilst worrying about money.
- For a nice surprise, [sign up your whole family for spots on the bus](http://mandrillapp.com/track/click/30144456/docs.google.com?p=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) to participate in a Black Friday Walmart protest tomorrow morning in North Bergen, New Jersey. Bus leaves at 8am. Come one, come all!
