---
title: "My plans at FOSDEM: SourceHut, Hare, and Helios"
date: 2023-01-24
url: https://drewdevault.com/2023/01/24/2023-01-24-FOSDEM.html
slug: 2023-01-24-FOSDEM
word_count: 443
---

FOSDEM is right around the corner, and finally in person after long years of
dealing with COVID. I’ll be there again this year, and I’m looking forward to
it! I have four slots on the schedule (wow! Thanks for arranging these, FOSDEM
team) and I’ll be talking about several projects. There is a quick lightning
talk on Saturday to introduce Helios and tease a full-length talk on Sunday, a
meetup for the Hare community, and a meetup for the SourceHut community. I hope
to see you there!

[**Lightning talk: Introducing Helios**](https://fosdem.org/2023/schedule/event/helios/)

Saturday 12:00 at H.2215 (Ferrer)

> Helios is a simple microkernel written in part to demonstrate the applicability
> of the Hare programming language to kernels. This talk briefly explains why
> Helios is interesting and is a teaser for a more in-depth talk in the
> microkernel room tomorrow. 
>  Hare is a systems programming language designed to be simple, stable, and
> robust. Hare uses a static type system, manual memory management, and a minimal
> runtime. It is well-suited to writing operating systems, system tools,
> compilers, networking software, and other low-level, high performance tasks.
> Helios uses Hare to implement a microkernel, largely inspired by seL4.

[**BoF: The Hare programming language**](https://fosdem.org/2023/schedule/event/hare_meetup/)

Saturday 15:00 at UB2.147

> Hare is a systems programming language designed to be simple, stable, and
> robust. Hare uses a static type system, manual memory management, and a
> minimal runtime. It is well-suited to writing operating systems, system tools,
> compilers, networking software, and other low-level, high performance tasks. 
>  At this meeting we’ll sum up the state of affairs with Hare, our plans for the
> future, and encourage discussions with the community. We’ll also demonstrate a
> few interesting Hare projects, including Helios, a micro-kernel written in
> Hare, and encourage each other to work on interesting projects in the Hare
> community.

[**BoF: SourceHut meetup**](https://fosdem.org/2023/schedule/event/sourcehut/)

Saturday 16:00 at UB2.147

> SourceHut is a free software forge for developing software projects, providing
> git and mercurial hosting, continuous integration, mailing lists, and more.
> We’ll be meeting here again in 2023 to discuss the platform and its community,
> the completion of the GraphQL rollout and the migration to the EU, and any
> other topics on the minds of the attendees.

[**Introducing Helios**](https://fosdem.org/2023/schedule/event/heliosuk/)

Sunday 13:00 at H.1308 (Rolin)

> Helios is a simple microkernel written in part to demonstrate the
> applicability of the Hare programming language to kernels. This talk will
> introduce the design and rationale for Helios, address some details of its
> implementation, compare it with seL4, and elaborate on the broader plans for
> the system.
