---
title: "A Firefox addon for putting prices into perspective"
date: 2025-04-04
url: https://drewdevault.com/2025/04/04/2025-04-04-Price-perspective.html
slug: 2025-04-04-Price-perspective
word_count: 344
---

I had a fun idea for a small project this weekend, and so I quickly put it
together over the couple of days. The result is  [Price Perspective](https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/price-perspective/) .

Humor me: have you ever bought something, considered the price, and wondered how
that price would look to someone else? Someone in the developing world, or a
billionaire, or just your friend in Australia? In other words, can we develop an
intuition for  [purchasing power](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Purchasing_power) ?

The Price Perspective add-on answers these questions. Let’s consider an example:
my income is sufficient to buy myself a delivery pizza for dinner without a
second thought. How much work does it take for someone in Afghanistan to buy the
same pizza? I can fire up Price Perspective to check:

The results are pretty shocking.

How about another example: say I’m looking to buy a house in the Netherlands. I
fire up funda.nl and look at a few places in Amsterdam. After a few minutes
wondering if I’ll ever be in an economic position to actually  *afford*  any of
these homes (and speculating on if that day will come before or after I have
spent this much money on rent over my lifetime), I wonder what these prices look
like from the other side. Let’s see what it’d take for the Zuck to buy this
apartment I fancy:

Well… that’s depressing. Let’s experiment with Price Perspective to see what
it would take to make a dent in Zuck’s wallet. Let’s add some zeroes.

So, Zuckerberg over-bidding this apartment to the tune of €6.5B would cost him a
proportion of his annual income which is comparable to me buying it for €5,000.

How about the reverse? How long would I have to work to buy, say, Jeff Bezos’s
new mansion?

Yep. That level of wealth inequality is a sign of a totally normal, healthy,
well-functioning society.

Curious to try it out for yourself? Get Price Perspective from
 [addons.mozilla.org](https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/price-perspective/) , tell it where you live and how much money you make in
a year, and develop your own sense of perspective.
