---
title: "Using linkhut to signal-boost my bookmarks"
date: 2025-03-27
url: https://drewdevault.com/2025/03/27/2025-03-27-Using-linkhut.html
slug: 2025-03-27-Using-linkhut
word_count: 379
---

It must have been at least a year ago that I first noticed  [linkhut](https://linkhut.org/) , and its
flagship instance at  [ln.ht](https://ln.ht) , appear on SourceHut, where it immediately caught
my attention for its good taste in inspirations. Once upon a time, I had a
 [Pinboard](https://pinboard.in/)  account, which is a similar concept, but I never used it for anything
in the end. When I saw linkhut I had a similar experience: I signed up and
played with it for a few minutes before moving on.

I’ve been rethinking my relationship social media lately, as some may have
inferred from my unannounced disappearance from Mastodon. 1  While reflecting
on this again recently, in a stroke of belated inspiration I suddenly
appreciated the appeal of tools like linkhut, especially alongside RSS feeds –
signal-boosting stuff I read and found interesting.

The appeal of this reminds me of one of the major appeals of SoundCloud to me,
back when I used it circa… 2013? That is: I could listen to the music that
artists I liked were listening to, and that was  *amazing*  for discovering new
music. Similarly, for those of you who enjoy my blog posts, and want to read the
stuff I like reading, check out my  [linkhut feed](https://ln.ht/~ddevault) . You can even  [subscribe to
its RSS feed](https://ln.ht/_/feed/~ddevault)  if you like. There isn’t much there today, but I will be
filling it up with interesting articles I see and projects I find online.

I want to read  *your*  linkhut feed, too, but it’s pretty quiet there at the
moment. If you find the idea interesting, sign up for an account or set up your
own instance and start bookmarking stuff – and  [email me](mailto:sir@cmpwn.com)  your feed so I can
find some good stuff to subscribe to in my own feed reader.

1. And simultaneous disappearance from BlueSky, though I imagine hardly
anyone noticed given that I had only used it for a couple of weeks. When I
set out to evaluate BlueSky for its merits from an OSS framing (findings:
both surprisingly open and not open enough), I also took a moment to
evaluate the social experience – and found it wanting. Then I realized that
I also felt that way about Mastodon, and that was the end of that. ↩︎
