---
title: "A eulogy for Vim"
date: 2026-03-25
url: https://drewdevault.com/2026/03/25/2026-03-25-Forking-vim.html
slug: 2026-03-25-Forking-vim
word_count: 1058
---

Vim is important to me. I’m using it to write the words you’re reading right
now. In fact, almost every word I have ever committed to posterity, through this
blog, in my code, all of the docs I’ve written, emails I’ve sent, and more,
almost all of it has passed through Vim.

My relationship with the software is intimate, almost as if it were an extra
limb. I don’t think about what I’m doing when I use it. All of Vim’s modes and
keybindings are deeply ingrained in my muscle memory. Using it just feels like
my thoughts flowing from my head, into my fingers, into a Vim-shaped extension
of my body, and out into the world. The unique and profound nature of my
relationship with this software is not lost on me.

I didn’t know Bram Moolenaar. We never met, nor exchanged correspondence. But,
after I moved to the Netherlands, Bram’s home country, in a strange way I felt a
little bit closer to him. He passed away a couple of years after I moved here,
and his funeral was held not far from where I lived at the time. When that
happened, I experienced an odd kind of mourning. He was still young, and he had
affected my own life profoundly. He was a stranger, and I never got to thank
him.

The people he entrusted Vim to were not strangers, they knew Bram and worked
with him often, and he trusted them. It’s not my place to judge their work as
disrespectful to his memory, or out of line with what he would have wanted. Even
knowing Bram only through Vim, I know he and I disagreed often. However, the
most personal thing I know about Bram, and that many people remember about him,
was his altruistic commitment to a single cause: providing education and
healthcare to Ugandan children in need. So, at the very least, I know that he
cared.

I won’t speculate on how he would have felt about generative AI, but I can say
that GenAI is something I care about. It causes a lot of problems for a lot of
people. It drives rising energy prices in poor communities, disrupts wildlife
and fresh water supplies, increases pollution, and stresses global supply
chains. It re-enforces the horrible, dangerous working conditions that miners in
many African countries are enduring to supply rare metals like Cobalt for the
billions of new chips that this boom demands. And at a moment when the climate
demands immediate action to reduce our footprint on this planet, the AI boom is
driving data centers to consume a full 1.5% of the world’s total energy
production in order to eliminate jobs and replace them with a robot that lies.

Meanwhile, this whole circus is enabling the rising tide of fascism around the
world, not only by supercharging propaganda but also by directly financially
supporting fascist policies and policymakers.  All this to enrich the few,
centralize power, reduce competition, and underwrite an enormous bubble that,
once it bursts, will ruin the lives of millions of the world’s poor and
marginalized classes.

I don’t think it’s  *cute*  that someone  [vibe coded “battleship” in VimScript](https://www.vim.org/vim-9.2-released.php#:~:text=The%20maturity,Copilot) .
I think it’s more important that we stop collectively pretending that we don’t
understand how awful all of this is. I don’t want to use software which has
slop in it. I do what I can to avoid it, and sadly even Vim now comes under
scrutiny in that effort as both  [Vim](https://github.com/vim/vim/issues/18800#issuecomment-3568099543)  and  [NeoVim](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/issues?q=label%3A%22AI%20assisted%20%F0%9F%A4%96%22)  are
relying on LLMs to develop the software.

So this is how, a few years after Bram’s passing, I find myself in another
unusual moment of mourning: mourning Vim itself. What an odd feeling.

To keep my conscience clear, and continue to enjoy the relationship I have with
this amazing piece of software, I have forked Vim. You can find my fork here:
 [Vim Classic](https://sr.ht/~sircmpwn/vim-classic/) .

The choice of which version to use as the basis for a fork was a bit difficult.
The last version of Vim released during Bram’s lifetime was Vim 9.0. To me, that
seems like a good starting point. But, in the end, I chose to base my fork on
Vim 8.2.0148 instead. Patch 148 was the patch immediately prior to the
introduction of Vim9 Script, Vim 9.0’s flagship feature.

I’m sure Bram worked hard on Vim9 script, and I want to honor that. At the same
time, it was still very new when he passed away, and the job of fully realizing
its potential was handed down to the current maintainers. Its absence from Vim
Classic is an honest assessment that I don’t have the time or energy to try to
sort out all of the work on Vim9 which followed in Bram’s footsteps, and decide
what stays and what goes. It seems like a useful line to draw in the sand: Vim
Classic is compatible with legacy plugins, but not the newfangled stuff.

Since forking from this base, I have backported a handful of patches, most of
which address CVEs discovered after this release, but others which address minor
bug fixes. I also penned a handful of original patches which bring the codebase
from this time up to snuff for building it on newer toolchains. My old vimrc
 [needed very few changes](https://paste.sr.ht/~sircmpwn/bf58300e4b11542b17eeece9a3671656172f86c8)  to work on this version of Vim, and all of
my plugins work with the exception of fzf.vim, which I would like to fix at some
point (or maybe a sympathetic reader is willing to work on backporting the
necessary changes).

I plan to use this for a little while, look for sore points and rough edges,
collect feedback from other users, and then tag a little release soon. Going
forward, maintenance will be slow and quiet. I welcome your patches,
particularly to help with maintaining the runtime scripts, stuff like making
sure new language features end up in the syntax files. I’ll also gladly accept
new bug fixes, and maybe even a few new features if a good case can be made for
including them. Backporting small patches from Vim upstream will be considered,
with extra scrutiny.

In short, I invite you to use Vim Classic, if you feel the same way as me, and
to maintain it with me, contributing the patches you need to support your own
use cases.
