---
title: "Why 2004 Won’t Be Like 1984"
date: 2004-08-16
url: https://daringfireball.net/2004/08/2004_wont_be_like_1984
slug: 2004_wont_be_like_1984
word_count: 3935
---


My reason for writing “[The Art of the Parlay](http://daringfireball.net/2004/08/parlay)” — revisiting the
conventional wisdom surrounding Apple’s mid-’80s decision not to license
the Macintosh — is that current events have made the topic relevant.


Those current events, of course, are related to the Apple music platform:
the iPod, iTunes, and iTMS.


The relevance to Apple’s 20-year-old licensing decisions is that nearly
every mainstream media pundit who opens his mouth about the iPod —
especially in the wake of RealNetworks’ [Harmony announcement](http://daringfireball.net/2004/07/magic_8ball_harmony) — has
decided that Apple is, all together now, *making the same mistake with the
iPod that they made with the Macintosh.*


I.e., that Apple didn’t license the Macintosh, Microsoft did license their
operating systems, and that’s why Microsoft won and Apple lost. And now
Apple is doing the same thing with the iPod and the iTMS.


I’m here to tell you this is utter bunk. Apple’s position with the iPod
is significantly different — and much stronger — than their position
with Macintosh 20 years ago. There are admittedly a few similarities,
first and foremost of which is that both products are much better
designed than any competing product. Second, uh, they both use 12-point
Chicago as the system font. (Except for the Mini, which uses Espy Sans,
the Newton’s system font.)


The gist of my parlay argument is that the biggest difference between
Apple and Microsoft — and the biggest reason for Microsoft’s lucrative
monopolies in operating systems and office software — is that Microsoft
built upon their previous successes, and Apple did not. Windows parlayed
off MS-DOS, and Office parlayed off Windows. The Macintosh didn’t parlay
off anything.


One potentially unsettling consequence of looking at the old
Mac-vs.-Windows debate in light of this parlay theory — at least for
those whose Mac enthusiasm borders on religious fervor — is that it leads
one to revisit additional nuggets of conventional wisdom. E.g. the idea
that the Mac-vs.-Windows competition is an example proving that the better
product doesn’t always win (often mentioned alongside Betamax-vs.-VHS as
a canonical example).


But *was* the Mac “better” than Windows? Better designed, yes. No
question. *But there are other metrics than design.* One being
compatibility. And in terms of compatibility, DOS/Windows was better than
the Mac.


Microsoft looked at the PC market and asked, “How can we make the most
money?” Their answer was to sell software to the business market, because
that’s where the money is. Pure pragmatism: corporations are
conservative, change slowly, and hold compatibility (and low prices) in
high regard.


Apple looked at the PC market and asked, “How can we make something better
than everything out there?” Their answer was the Macintosh. Pure idealism.


The Mac competed solely on the basis of the quality of its design.
DOS/Windows competed on the basis of being compatible with what was
already out there (and being cheaper (a factor that’s probably too
important to be stuffed into a parenthetical)). Compatible with existing
x86 PC hardware. Compatible with existing PC peripherals. And most
importantly, compatible with existing software and software development
techniques.


The result is that the Mac ended up appealing only to the segment of the
market that values design over compatibility. Five to ten percent of the
overall PC market is probably about right. Especially since in the Mac’s
case, it was design at the *expense* of compatibility — there was no
way both to remain compatible with the DOS/Apple-II state-of-the-art and
produce something insanely great.


## The Apple Music Platform, and the Parlay


So the gist of the current punditry’s iPod-as-Mac analogy boils down to
this: *Apple makes something cool, but then they keep it to themselves,
and then they lose the market to a knock-off from Microsoft that gets
licensed to other manufacturers.*


But if you’re with me in my parlay argument, you can see just how much
stronger Apple’s position with the iPod is. *Apple’s entire music platform
is a pure parlay:*

- The iPod, iTunes, and iTMS work with any modern personal computer,
Windows or Mac. Yes, the original iPod debuted as a Mac-only
peripheral, and iTunes for Windows appeared even later — but Apple
offered complete support for Windows relatively quickly.
- The iPod and iTunes are fully compatible with your existing CD and
MP3 music collections.


The first point — Apple’s full support for Windows — has led some to
speculate, foolishly, that it’s a sign that Apple is moving away from the
Mac. *They’re going to dump the Mac to make consumer electronics!*
Possible, of course, but highly unlikely given that the Mac is still the
main source of Apple’s revenue and profits. The more obvious, but boring
explanation is that Apple’s support for Windows is purely pragmatic: most
people use Windows, and Apple wants Windows users to buy iPods.


Ideally, yes, Apple would also like them to replace their Wintel PCs
with Macs. If Apple were still purely idealistic, they’d treat the iPod
as a Mac peripheral. *You want an iPod? Buy a Mac.* (This was, in fact,
the stated reason behind the original iPod’s Mac-only compatibility. But
in hindsight, it seems plausible that it was simply part of a staged
plan: ship it for the Mac first and see how it goes; if there’s demand,
release a version for Windows.)


The second point — Apple’s full support for MP3 and other non-protected
audio formats — is curiously and significantly underemphasized in the
mainstream media, especially in coverage of the recent RealNetworks
brouhaha. See, for example, [Saul Hansell’s report for the The New York
Times](http://www.nytimes.com/2004/07/26/technology/26real.html?ex=1248494400&en=7aec01ce3c215a49&ei=5090&partner=rssuserland), breaking the RealNetworks/Harmony story (emphasis added):


> Tomorrow, without Apple’s authorization, RealNetworks will
> start to give away software that will allow people to buy and
> download songs from its online music store and then play them
> on Apple’s popular iPod portable devices in addition to those
> that use the Windows Media Player format and RealNetworks’
> Helix format.
> **This will be the first time any company other than Apple has
> sold songs for the iPod.** While the Microsoft Corporation has
> freely licensed the Windows format to various music stores
> and makers of portable players, Apple has kept its business
> proprietary.


To their credit, the Times ran a correction two days later, and appended
it to the bottom of the original article’s web page:


> *An article in Business Day on Monday about plans by
> RealNetworks to give away software that will let people
> download songs from its online music store and play them on
> Apple’s iPod referred imprecisely to other sources of songs
> for the player. While RealNetworks will be the first besides
> Apple to sell them in the protected iPod format, other
> companies sell them in the MP3 format, which the player can
> also use.*


But even this correction ignores the fact the iPod is compatible with
songs ripped from CDs — which means the iPod is compatible with the vast
majority of the music people already own. As in *legally* own.


The only proprietary aspect of the iPod is with *protected* audio formats,
a.k.a. DRM. The songs Apple sells through the iTunes Music Store are
protected using Apple’s own FairPlay DRM system; and it’s the one and only
DRM system Apple supports.


But for all the publicity and attention the iTMS has garnered, it’s
essential to put it in perspective. Apple has now sold just over 100
millions songs through the iTMS. But how many *billions* of songs do iPod
users already own, legally and legitimately ripped from CD?


This isn’t a hidden feature. There’s no trick to it. Apple exerted itself
to make it as easy as possible to transfer your music from CDs to your
iPod. You put an audio CD in your computer; you click one button in
iTunes; you connect your iPod.


*That’s* compatibility. If you enjoy music enough to consider buying a
$300 iPod, there’s a good chance you have a CD collection numbering in the
hundreds. Thousands of songs, which cost thousands of dollars. The iPod
and iTunes fully embrace your existing music collection.


Already have music in MP3 format, from sources unknown? The iPod and
iTunes will play them, no questions asked. That’s compatibility.


(Compare and contrast to Sony, whose [latest supposed “iPod-killer”](http://www.macobserver.com/article/2004/07/28.2.shtml)
stubbornly only plays songs in Sony’s proprietary ATRAC format.)


Point being, for all the attention it gets, the iTMS is a completely
optional part of the iPod experience. You can buy an iPod and completely
fill it with music without spending a single dollar at the iTMS.


In short, the issue of compatibility — and of parlaying a new platform
off existing, successful platforms — is an enormous difference between
the iPod and ’80s-era Macintosh.


The Macintosh was an incompatible hardware platform that required
incompatible software.


The iPod is hardware compatible with existing PCs and Macs. iTunes is
compatible with both Windows and Macs. And most importantly, they’re
both compatible with the billions of CDs people already own.


## Pro-Choice


RealNetworks’ battle cry in the Harmony debate is “Choice!” Consumers
demand and deserve “choice”, and despotic Apple isn’t offering it to them.
(Microsoft has also played the “choice” card — cf. last year’s “[Closed
Is Open](http://daringfireball.net/2003/10/closed_is_open)”. Look for Microsoft to reiterate the “choice” angle when
their own music store platform launches.)


But when RealNetworks whines about choice, they’re only talking about
choice between rival DRM platforms. And it’s true that Apple denies iPod
owners this choice.


But what Apple provides is a larger and more important choice: the choice
not to use DRM protected audio at all.


Harmony is *not* going to help Apple sell more iPods. Harmony is simply
an attempt by RealNetworks to sell songs to iPod users. There’s no shame
in that — but no benefit to Apple, either.


One argument is that Harmony appeals to people who are concerned about
DRM lock-in. I.e., if you spend your money on music at the iTMS, what happens
if in a year or two you decide to buy a music player from another
company? Holy shit, you’re locked-in!


This is so fallacious, it’s hard to see how anyone is falling for it. DRM
lock-in is indeed a serious issue — but the people who are concerned
about lock-in aren’t going to trust RealNetworks (or Microsoft) any more than
they trust Apple. They’re going to buy non-DRM music, *which the iPod
already embraces*.


Plus, Apple allows you to burn your iTMS songs to good old-fashioned
unprotected CDs — which you can then import for use on non-Apple music
players. A pain in the ass? A bit. But a far cry from fascist lock-in.


The other argument trotted out by RealNetworks and its supporters is
that they’re selling higher-quality audio files than Apple — Real’s
songs are encoded at 192 Kbps, Apple’s at 128. But this is not so simple
an issue as higher quality being better — otherwise we’d all be using
lossless encoding formats. There’s a space trade-off, which maybe isn’t
so important to 40 GB iPod users, but is quite important indeed to 4 GB
iPod Mini users.


And in the same way that those wary of DRM aren’t buying protected audio
files from anyone, music connoisseurs who are bothered by Apple’s lossy
compression aren’t going to be satisfied with Real’s compression, either,
even if it is less lossy than Apple’s. They’re going to buy CDs.


## Control This


USA Today columnist Kevin Maney wrote about the RealNetworks/Apple
dispute on August 3 (“[Apple’s control-freak tendencies could crush
iPod](http://www.usatoday.com/tech/columnist/kevinmaney/2004-08-03-jobs_x.htm)”). Not only did he get just about everything wrong, but along
the way he hit every one of the clueless “Apple is repeating their
Macintosh mistakes with the iPod” talking points. It’s worth examining
point-by-point.


Maney starts:


> The past couple of years, Apple Computer CEO Steve Jobs has
> gotten nothing but roses and kisses from the public and the
> media.
> But a feud between Apple and RealNetworks over music
> downloads is exposing Jobs’ tragic flaw. Amazingly, he seems
> to be making the same devastating mistakes with the iPod that
> he made with the Mac 20 years ago.


Uh-oh. Not looking good.


> Given the subject, it’s only fitting to put the situation to
> music, so here’s part of the story to the tune of the old hit
> *American Pie*:


This is so corny, I’m embarrassed even to republish it.


> *Long, long time ago 
> *
> He knew the Mac was truly great; 
> it trumped that DOS made by Bill Gates
> And dominated PCs for a while.


No, it didn’t. The Mac *never* dominated the PC industry. It peaked with
a market share around 10 percent. (Apple arguably “dominated” the PC
industry in the early years of the Apple II, but not with the Mac.)


> But ’85 in retrospect 
> looks like a case of gross neglect
> Bad news of a crisis; 
> the Mac, Jobs wouldn’t license


First, Jobs was on his way out of the company in 1985. Second, don’t get
me started on the licensing thing again.


> I can’t remember if I cried 
> as I watched Apple’s business slide
> Too bad those lessons weren’t applied 
> The day the iPod died


The lessons of an incompatible hardware platform that never grew
significant market share (Macintosh), applied to a highly-compatible
hardware platform that’s maintained an overwhelming market share lead over
all competitors for two years (iPod). Apply that *how*?


> The iPod has half the digital music player market, and iTunes
> sells 70% of all legitimate music downloads. Jobs practically
> willed the digital music business into being. […]
> But Jobs has blown it before — and, boy, does it look like
> he’s blowing it again.


When before has Steve Jobs been in charge of a platform with half the
market? (Never.)


> But around 1985, Jobs and his executives decided not to
> license Apple’s technology or operating system to any other
> company. Apple wanted total control. It wanted to sell all
> the products itself. It wanted no competitors.


That sounds sinister. Another way to put it is that Apple was selling
Macintoshes for very high profit margins, and wanted to keep those profits
for itself. Which is what corporations do.


> This was a yawning opening for Microsoft, Intel and the PC.
> Since anyone could buy the licenses and components to make a
> Windows-based PC, that technology took wing.


So according to Maney’s timeframe here, Microsoft, Intel, and the PC
didn’t take wing until 1985? Talk about revisionist history. Microsoft and
Intel were in fact both on the path to industry domination years before
the Macintosh, and the Mac had little to no effect upon their vectors.


> This year, Apple is left with less than 4% of the market
> for personal computers — basically a cult following.


Ah, yes, Apple’s “cult following” — every hack pundit’s favorite means of
dismissing Apple entirely. *The Mac only has four percent market share,
and even that doesn’t count because it’s just a cult following.* “Cult”
implies irrationality.


> More recently, Jobs has done for digital music what he once
> did for personal computing: He’s made it appealing to
> non-techies. Once again, his design sets the pace. No device
> is as good as the iPod; no software solution works better
> than iTunes.


About the iPod and iTunes, he’s correct. About the credit, he’s wrong —
Jobs is the CEO, not the company. Apple engineers designed and created
the iPod and iTunes, not Jobs. I have no idea why hacks tend to conflate
Apple (the company) and Jobs (the CEO). Would Maney write that
Bill Gates released a new version of Windows?


> But like the Mac of 1985, it’s a closed system. Other than
> open-source MP3 files, only music downloaded through iTunes
> will play on iPods, and iTunes music won’t play on any
> portable device except an iPod.


Here’s some not-so-clever misdirection: *If you ignore MP3 files, the
iPod only plays Apple’s own proprietary iTMS songs.* But that’s a little
like arguing that if it weren’t for cash, you’d have to use credit cards
for every purchase. True, but there *is* cash. And there are MP3s —
billions of them, all compatible with the iPod. And it’s not just MP3
files — the iPod also plays WAV and AAC files.


Recall that the iTMS didn’t even exist for the first two years of the
iPod.


(It’s also worth pointing out that MP3 is not an “open source” format.
The MP3 format is owned by Thomson, and companies like Apple must pay
Thomson [royalties](http://www.mp3licensing.com/royalty/) to decode and encode MP3 files. But why bother
getting the details right when you’re writing for USA Today?)


> Apple refuses to license the technology to third parties.
> Instead of setting a standard for all, Apple wants to own
> it all.


It’s almost as though they’re a for-profit corporation, attempting to
maximize their revenue from a wildly popular product and service.
Absurd.


> When Microsoft behaves that way, everybody screams
> antitrust.


Perhaps that’s because Microsoft is a monopolist, and has been convicted
of illegally abusing their monopoly positions. With the iPod and iTunes,
Apple is a market leader, but not a monopolist — thus anyone who
described their licensing decisions as “antitrust” would be talking out
of their ass. Or writing for USA Today, I suppose.


> Last week, Real publicly exposed Apple’s obduracy. Real
> announced that it has a way for people to legally download
> and play songs that work on both Apple’s products and
> Windows-based products.


Actually, Real’s Harmony *only* works for Windows-based products,
because Harmony is only available for Windows. As [John C. Welch points
out on his weblog](http://www.bynkii.com/generic_computertry/archives/2004_08.html): “‘Choice’ is defined as ‘You have to use
Windows’. In fact, from what I can tell, there is only one major music
store that gives users on multiple platforms the access to the full
range of its features… the iTMS.”


> It’s the kind of flexibility consumers want. But Apple
> doesn’t seem to care.


What consumers? The ones buying iPods? The ones waiting to buy iPod
Minis? Or just the ones who pull things out of their ass for USA
Today?


A large part of the appeal of the iTMS is the “It Just Works” factor.
Because it bypasses the browser and the concept of “downloading”,
working instead entirely within iTunes itself, buying songs and getting
them onto your iPod *just works*. Somehow I doubt the user experience of
the Walmart.com music store can match it.


> “Consumers are not in the end going to put up with being
> locked in,” says Josh Bernoff, consumer tech analyst at
> Forrester Research.


So perhaps they’ll buy their music on CD, rip it to unprotected non-DRM
audio formats, and play it on their… iPods?


> Music has a long history of competing standards in new
> technology, but the split never lasts. In 1950, it was RCA
> Victor’s 45 rpm record vs. Columbia’s 33, and eventually all
> record players accommodated both. In 1970, it was Philips’
> audio cassette vs. the eight-track — invented by William
> Powell Lear, who also created the Learjet. The eight-track
> soon disappeared.
> Apple can’t win by keeping its music technology to itself.


Why not? They’re selling 70 percent of DRM-protected music now. As Jobs
has stated in interviews, if some other music store gains significant
market share, Apple will consider supporting it. But for now, why share,
other than to be charitable?


According to Maney and his ilk, Apple is doing everything wrong — but
yet somehow they’ve got the number one music player and the number one
online music store.


## Choosing When to Take a Long Shot


Even if you remain convinced that Apple “must” license its music
platform, isn’t that exactly [what they’re doing with HP](http://www.apple.com/pr/library/2004/jan/08hp.html)?


That HP is on the cusp of releasing its own licensed version of the iPod
— now, while the iPod is still the undisputed leader in both design and
market share — is alone reason enough not to compare Apple’s position
with the iPod to their position with the Mac 20 years ago.


It’s baffling that those criticizing Apple’s decision to spurn
RealNetworks describe Apple as being unwilling to license their
technology, when in fact they’ve done exactly that — partnering with a
company that is much larger than Apple itself.


To insist that Apple ought to be thankful to RealNetworks and to allow
their Harmony technology to work is to say that Apple should allow other
companies to freeload.


With the HP deal, Apple will be earning licensing fees and has gained a
partner with the second-largest PC market share and extensive retail
sales presence — i.e. Apple stands to benefit directly from the deal.
Whereas with RealNetworks’ Harmony, the only company that stands to gain
anything is RealNetworks.


Yes, Apple makes way more money selling iPods than they do songs at the
iTMS. Yes, Apple probably only makes about 10 cents per song sold. And,
yes, Steve Jobs has stated that the iTMS is a loss-leader
(“break-even-leader” is perhaps more apt) intended to sell more iPods.


And so the argument goes, *If the iTMS is just there to sell iPods, why
not welcome another music store that supports the iPod?*


It’s foolish to think that every public statement from Apple’s
executives is the plain truth about their actual strategy.


The fact is, the market for DRM music is nascent. It remains to be seen
whether *any* DRM-protected media format will be a long-term success.
The entertainment industry certainly hopes so; consumer advocates
certainly hope not.


If consumers revolt against DRM, and protected media slowly fades into
oblivion, Apple has lost nothing. The iPod and iTunes have embraced
unprotected audio files from the beginning.


But assuming that DRM-protected media takes hold, history indicates that
one format will dominate the industry. The three major contenders now
are Apple, Microsoft, and RealNetworks — and it’s generous to put
RealNetworks in the list.


Is it any wonder or surprise that Apple would like to be the company
that wins?


It’s difficult to speculate on the long-term prospects for the iPod.
Certainly it isn’t hard to imagine that 10 years out, a music player
equivalent to today’s iPod might sell for $20 or $30. iPods are either
going to get a lot cheaper, or gain a lot more features. Or both. Either
way, that’s uncertainty.


Establishing a de facto standard format for DRM audio, on the other
hand, is the type of success that keeps on succeeding. Ten cents a song
on 100 million songs is nice; sell a couple of billion songs, and you’re
talking about a serious cash cow. Not to mention the potential to parlay
success with DRM audio into success with DRM *video*.


That’s not to say I’m a fan of DRM-protected media. I’m not. But whether
you like it or not, there’s a high-stakes competition going on to
establish a de facto standard DRM format, and at the moment, Apple is
winning. This game is far from over, and Apple’s going to be damned if
they’re going to give RealNetworks or Microsoft a helping hand.



| **Previous:** | [Things Unmentioned in the ‘Art of the Parlay’ Article, but of Which You Must Take My Word Were Left Out Because They Were Beside the Point, and Not Because I Was Unaware of Them](https://daringfireball.net/2004/08/things_unmentioned) |
| **Next:** | [OmniWeb 5.0](https://daringfireball.net/2004/08/omniweb_5) |


PreviousNext