---
title: "Today’s Theme: Themes"
date: 2004-10-19
url: https://daringfireball.net/2004/10/themes
slug: themes
word_count: 1145
---


At the end of Saturday’s “[Brushed Metal and the HIG](https://daringfireball.net/2004/10/brushedmetal)”, I asked:


> To those of you who think this state of affairs is just fine,
> that there’s no problem with Mac OS X providing two disparate
> themes for developers to choose between based on whim, I ask
> this: If two themes are OK, why not three or four?


This was sort of a trick question, because arguably, there already *are*
three Mac OS X themes from Apple, and perhaps a fourth on the way in
10.4. (Let’s not even mention the ridiculous woodgrain-and-ebony custom
theme used in [GarageBand](http://www.apple.com/ilife/garageband/).)


## The ‘Pro’ Theme


For lack of an official name, let’s call the third theme *Pro*, since
it’s the look and feel [used by Apple in its “Pro” line of media
production software](http://www.apple.com/software/pro/): Final Cut, Motion, DVD Studio Pro, and Logic.
(Shake seems to use something slightly different, but perhaps that’s
because it’s still a recent Apple acquisition.)


The Pro theme is a sort of graphite-gray sibling to Aqua. Here’s the
inspector window from Motion:


And here’s a close-up of DVD Studio Pro:


In some ways, the Pro theme is even more different from the normal Aqua
appearance than is brushed metal. Brushed metal is primarily just a
look-and-feel for window frames; the controls themselves in a metal
window aren’t any different. The Pro theme, however, consists of an
entire alternate set of control widgets: lists, buttons, sliders,
pop-ups, etc.


Motion even goes so far as to offer yet another set of controls for use
in [special palette windows which are called “dashboards”](http://www.apple.com/motion/workflow.html) (which
term is likely to cause confusion when 10.4 ships, with its [Dashboard](http://www.apple.com/macosx/tiger/dashboard.html) desktop widgetry feature). It’s a Darth-Vaderish sort of thing:


For what it’s worth, I think the Pro theme looks very nice — the overall effect is much more graceful and understated than the brighter, somewhat childish look of both normal Aqua and brushed metal windows. But what that’s worth is very little — as I framed the issue in the last post, my point in bringing all this up is *not* to argue about which themes look good and which don’t.


The point is consistency. Not usability, not how easy something is to
learn, but consistency for its own sake. Nor is it aesthetics. Whether
one theme is better-looking than the other is a matter of taste; whether
the interface is being used consistently across applications is not. 
Apple’s apparent desire to assert its Pro line of software as being
special by using a custom suite-wide theme comes directly at the expense
of system-wide consistency.


Consistency does not imply monotony. There’s plenty of room for
creative UI design within the context of the default Aqua theme. Plus,
brushed metal and Aqua could conceivable coexist *consistently* if Apple
itself were willing to limit its use of brushed metal to apps that fit
specific criteria defined in the HIG. But this Pro theme is
even worse, consistency-wise. How would you even begin to codify
appropriate use of the Pro theme in the HIG? *If your application is a
professional production tool, and your company headquarters are at 1
Infinite Loop, Cupertino CA, you may use the Pro theme to provide a
special appearance for your application.*


This isn’t about using a few custom controls. Obviously, advanced media
production and design apps need to offers users the ability to perform
tasks that aren’t suited to the standard UI controls provided by the
system. Adobe and Macromedia certainly have a number of custom controls
in their suites of software. The difference, however, is that Adobe and
Macromedia design their custom controls to blend in with the regular
look and feel of the system, and when they can use standard controls,
they do. Apple’s Pro theme is replacement of the default theme, not a
supplement to it.


Unlike brushed metal, the Pro theme is not available to third-party
developers. This might help establish a brand for the company’s
suite of high-end production software — but at the expense of the brand
of the company’s entire platform. Is it not reasonable to conclude that
Apple deems Mac OS X’s default appearance not good enough for its own
use?


How long until third-party developers start implementing the Pro look
and feel on their own? That’s what happened with brushed metal, before
Apple officially supported its use in third-party software. Or imagine
the chaos if other major developers follow Apple’s lead and start
shipping software using their own unique themes?


## Tiger’s New Theme


Apple’s fourth theme is something slated to arrive with 10.4. It’s not a
secret: you can see it in the screenshots Apple has posted for
[Spotlight](http://www.apple.com/macosx/tiger/spotlight.html) and the updated version of [System Prefs](http://www.apple.com/macosx/tiger/search_prefs.html). Unlike
brushed metal or the Pro theme, however, this new look is so subtle you
may not even notice it.


It’s mostly like Aqua, but with certain touches borrowed from brushed
metal; particularly the way that window title bars and the toolbar area
underneath are combined as a single expanse. And, mercifully, it’s free of
pinstripes. In the same way that brushed metal matches the look of
PowerBook and PowerMac hardware, this new theme is perhaps intended to
evoke the look of iBook and iMac hardware. Here’s a portion of the main
System Prefs window from Apple’s preview of 10.4:


But while it may not be a secret, I haven’t seen any official word from
Apple about this new look, such as what to call it, or whether it’ll be
officially supported for use by third-party developers. I’ve heard from
several developers who referred to it as the “unified title bar and toolbar
appearance”, which doesn’t exactly roll off the tongue, but it’s
certainly an apt description.


I’m not sure what to make of this new theme. My hope is that it’s an
attempt by Apple to rectify the current inconsistent mess — that it’s
more of an expansion of the standard Aqua theme rather than something
altogether new, intended for use instead of brushed metal in situations
where, for whatever reasons, the default Aqua appearance is deemed
undesirable. And that it will be used consistently for well-defined
reasons. (Here’s to hoping that it’s not merely coincidence that the
Back/Forward buttons as seen in the above screenshot from System Prefs
very much resemble the Back/Forward buttons in Safari.)


My fear, of course, is that it’s just a third window frame, and that the
only factor determining when it will be used is whether it looks cool.


Consistency in and of itself has been a fundamental pillar of the Mac
user experience from 1984 onward. But with Apple no longer leading the
way, it’s fading. “At least it’s still more consistent than Windows” is
not high praise.



| **Previous:** | [Brushed Metal and the HIG](https://daringfireball.net/2004/10/brushed-metal) |
| **Next:** | [Does This Brushed Metal Stuff Really Even Matter?](https://daringfireball.net/2004/10/does_brushed_metal_matter) |


PreviousNext