---
title: "BBEdit 8"
date: 2004-09-14
url: https://daringfireball.net/2004/09/bbedit_8
slug: bbedit_8
word_count: 4570
---


All applications are software; but not all software is an application.
The key difference is the primacy of the user interface in application
development. To [paraphrase Edward Tufte](http://www.37signals.com/svn/archives/000831.php), the user interface *is*
the application — whereas most non-application software doesn’t even
*have* a user interface.


From the perspective of a programmer, all software is just source code.
In a broad sense, the source code for a UI-less background process such
as the [Apache](http://apache.org/) web server very much resembles the source code for a
GUI application. Developers’ relationship with the software they produce
is abstract, conceptual. When an artist wants to produce a circle, he
draws a circle. When a programmer wants to produce a circle, he writes a
few lines of source code. It is the ability to grasp these abstractions
that separates programmers from non-programmers.


From the perspective of users, however, the importance of the user
interface is profound. For users, the application is what they can see,
click, and interact with. A user’s relationship with an application is
perceptual, sensual.


The raw capabilities of a particular application are, for most users,
irrelevant; it’s the *usability* that matters. Features which aren’t
presented via an intuitive, discoverable, usable interface might as well
not even exist.


For something as inherently nerdy as a text editor, [BBEdit](http://www.barebones.com/products/bbedit/index.shtml) is
phenomenally popular. But its appeal is not universal: in addition to
those who simply have no need for a serious text editor, or who simply
prefer other editors, there are vocal contingents of BBEdit
non-believers who profess outright bewilderment at BBEdit’s decade-long
dominance of the Mac text editor market.


There are two vectors for such bewilderment, both of which belie a
genuine understanding of what it is about BBEdit’s “interface” that
makes it so beloved:

- One is the conflation of *aesthetics* with usability. The idea that
the quality of an app’s user interface is simply a measure of how
good it looks; i.e., that the state of being “Mac-like” implies only
adherence to the gestalt of Apple’s recent-vintage Aqua-flavored
visual whiz-bangery: gorgeous iconography, anti-aliased type,
vibrant primary colors, and visual effects such as transparency,
drop shadows, bezel edges, and smooth-gliding animated widgets.
This is not to say that aesthetics are unimportant. To find
something aesthetically pleasing is deeply satisfying in a
right-brained way. But aesthetic appeal is but one aspect of user
interface design, not the whole of it — and for a serious tool, not
the most important aspect. Compare and contrast to, say, choosing an
office chair. It’s certainly nice to have a chair that looks good;
but if you’re going to be sitting in it 8 or more hours every day,
ergonomics are much more important than aesthetics.
I won’t dispute that BBEdit’s interface is relatively unadorned; but
so while it’s not *pretty*, it isn’t trying to be. *Handsome* is
perhaps more apt. The layout of windows, dialogs, and menus is
meticulous and thoughtful. The point is not to impress you; the
point is to enable you to get work done.
- The second is the belief that the user interface is worthy only of
afterthought; that the real software is the underlying
implementation, and that the user interface is but a wrapper. (Cf.
April’s “[Ronco Spray-On Usability](http://daringfireball.net/2004/04/spray_on_usability)”.)
This view is generally expressed only by those who are extremely
technically nerdy — i.e. the sort of guys who honestly see Mac OS X
as *Unix with a Mac GUI*, rather than as an updated version of the
Mac OS with Unix-like underpinnings. Their question to BBEdit
advocates, invariably, goes something like: “What does BBEdit do that
*[my favorite open source editor]* doesn’t do?”, where the variable
is usually [Emacs](http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/emacs.html) or [vi/vim](http://www.vim.org/) — or occasionally [jEdit](http://jedit.org/).
The problem is that this is not the right question. Emacs, Vim, and
their various derivatives are very fine editors, and inarguably
offer many powerful features. They are also difficult to learn,
cryptic to the uninitiated, and their human interfaces (such as they
are) are unlike anything a Mac user would consider normal. Some
would have you believe that such is the price of power — that
*easy-to-use* and *powerful* are mutually exclusive.
The appeal of BBEdit is in its balance of powerful text-editing
features and an elegant, intuitive, and unabashedly
*Macintosh*-style interface — and where by “interface” I don’t mean
in the sense of superficial cosmetic appeal, but in the deeper,
interactive sense.
It’s also worth pointing out here that “easy-to-use” is probably not
the right adjective. Once you have learned to use any software
package, no matter how cryptic its user interface may be, it can be
very “easy” to use. Hence it’s true that one might find Vim easy to
use if one takes the time to learn it and grow acclimated to its
keystroke-driven interface. But that’s a big “if”. The Macintosh’s
main appeal is not that it is easy-to-use, but rather that it is
easy-to-learn. The difference is significant, but often overlooked.


In short, the point of BBEdit is not just what it looks like or what it
does, but how it feels. The challenge Bare Bones faces when releasing a
major feature upgrade is not just to add to BBEdit’s capabilities, but
to do so in a Mac-like way.


## Brief Aside on the Case for Using Emacs or Vim


Furthermore, it’s also worth pointing out that, ironically, the most
compelling case for adopting Emacs or Vim as one’s primary editor is not
their feature sets, but their *interfaces*. Specifically, the fact that
they run *everywhere* in almost exactly the same way. Any system with a
Unix-like shell can run these editors, and as of 2004, every significant
desktop operating system either ships with a Unix-like shell or has one
available as a free download. Thus, if you master Emacs or Vim, you can
rightly feel quite confident that you’ll be able to use it on every
computer you use for the rest of your life.


If by circumstance or choice you use both a Mac and one or more
non-Macs, it’s an appealing thought to be able to use the same editor on
every system — using the same keystrokes, shortcuts, and customizations.


Text editing habits run deep. Mac users forced to switch to Windows
regularly plead with Bare Bones to port BBEdit to Windows. Windows users
who switch to the Mac regularly badger Bare Bones to make BBEdit more
like their favorite editor from Windows (e.g. [UltraEdit](http://ultraedit.com/) or
[TextPad](http://textpad.com/)). And, I’m guessing, after giving up on a BBEdit port to
Windows, former BBEdit users start badgering for the BBEdit-ification of
UltraEdit and TextPad.


Emacs and Vim users, on the other hand, just copy their configuration
files from one machine to another — be it Windows, Linux, or Mac —
and they’re right at home.


## BBEdit 8.0 First Impressions


Which brings us to [BBEdit 8.0](http://www.barebones.com/products/bbedit/index.shtml), the latest version of Bare Bones
Software’s flagship text editor, released with much fanfare two weeks
ago. Before we proceed, let’s just get it out of the way and link to my
standard [I-used-to-work-for-Bare-Bones-Software disclosure](http://daringfireball.net/2002/12/bare_bones_disclaimer).


The first thing you’ll notice is that BBEdit 8 sports a new application
icon. The stately capital B set in bold Palatino — a hallmark of
BBEdit’s iconography since its public debut 12 years ago — has been
replaced by something, well, a bit jauntier:


Reaction from the design community has not been kind:

- [Jon Hicks](http://www.hicksdesign.co.uk/journal/564/bare-bones-means-comic-sans): 

With the release of BBEdit 8.0, has come the most
inexplicable new feature. The application icon has been
updated with the most grotesque typography, looking like a
Comic Sans derivative.

(Hicks whipped up a replacement icon, which, whatever you think of
the new BBEdit 8 icon, is far worse — not because it’s unappealing,
but because it’s un-BBEdit-y.)
- [Andrei Herasimchuk](http://www.designbyfire.com/000144.html):

But what the hell is up with the new BBEdit 8.0 icon? That
has to be the worst looking “B” I’ve seen in some time. It
almost looks like a “B” from [Comic Sans](http://bancomicsans.com/)! And we all
know how catastrophic that is.


Suffice it to say the new icon is the most unpopular aspect of
version 8. On the other hand, if the icon is the most-complained-about
change, it speaks well for the application itself.


The most essential new aspect of BBEdit 8 isn’t what it looks like, or even what it does, but what it *doesn’t* do — which is run on Mac OS 9. In fact, not only does BBEdit 8 only run on Mac OS X, it requires 10.3.5, due to several bugs in earlier versions of Panther. (Having beta-tested BBEdit 8 under pre-10.3.5 builds of Panther, I can attest to this.)


This isn’t just an idle milestone — BBEdit 8’s Mac OS X-only nature
informs nearly all of its major new features.


This is not to say the last few versions of BBEdit didn’t take advantage
of Mac OS X-only features. E.g., shell worksheets and the built-in Web
Kit HTML preview, which for obvious reasons were only available when
running BBEdit on Mac OS X.


Now that it only runs on Mac OS X, however, BBEdit 8 can take advantage
of OS X-only features throughout the entire application, including UI
widgets only available on OS X. Most of the additions and changes to
BBEdit 8’s user interface are tied to OS X-only controls and
conventions.


I see no need to provide a comprehensive overview of every new feature;
[Bare Bones’ web site](http://www.barebones.com/products/bbedit/new.shtml) does a good job of that. And if that’s not
enough information for you, the [full change notes](http://www.barebones.com/support/bbedit/arch_bbedit80.shtml) are available:
over 300 bullet items spanning 27 printed pages. Needless to say, by any
measure, this is a significant update.


## Multi-Document Interface


The most profound addition is the new multiple-document interface.
Analogous to tabbed browsing with Safari, you can now open multiple
documents within a single BBEdit text window. A window’s open documents
are displayed in a drawer on the right side of the window.


Thus, the multi-document interface is much more like OmniWeb’s “tabbed”
browsing than Safari’s. And like OmniWeb, BBEdit 8 allows you to drag
documents from one window to another. Clicking an icon in the status bar
opens and closes the Documents drawer. (A nice touch: if the Documents
drawer in the front window is closed, it will open automatically if you
hover a dragged document on top of the drawer-toggling icon in the
status bar.)


The multi-document interface is, of course, completely optional. If
you’re not interested, you can merrily continue using BBEdit using only
the traditional one-document-per-window. Conversely, a few new
document-related preferences allow you to configure BBEdit to *always*
use the multi-document interface, putting new and opened documents in the
frontmost window by default.


It’s a radical departure from previous versions, where every text window
represented one document, and every open document was in its own window.
But it doesn’t feel radical. It just works, exactly how you’d expect it
to. You can ignore it, you can use it all the time, or, you can use it
when you want. I’ve been using the feature since it debuted during beta
testing, and while I tend to use the traditional one-document scheme
most of the time (if for no other reason than a decade of habit), I’ve
found the multi-document interface convenient for grouping related files
together.


If you don’t want to give up the screen real estate for the documents
drawer, you can keep it closed and switch between open documents in the
front window using the also-new Navigation Bar, which looks and works
very much like the Navigation Bar in Xcode.


## Unicode and Text Encoding Improvements


BBEdit 8 now uses [ATSUI](http://developer.apple.com/intl/atsui.html) for text rendering. In all prior versions of
BBEdit, the rendering engine was implemented using QuickDraw, a set of
APIs dating back to the original Mac. This is an enormous under-the-hood
change, text rendering being a core task of a text editor.


If you only use roman character sets, you likely won’t notice that
anything has changed — text editing and rendering looks and feels
identical to that of BBEdit 7. Where the new ATSUI-powered engine shines
is in the rendering of Unicode text. BBEdit now supports multiple
languages — e.g. Chinese, Japanese, and English — all within the same
document. If you don’t need advanced Unicode support, BBEdit’s new
ATSUI-powered rendering engine works just as well as the old QuickDraw
engine. If you do, you can now use BBEdit for tasks it previously
couldn’t handle. For a small subset of BBEdit users, this is one of the
biggest improvements in the history of the app.


BBEdit’s handling of text file encoding formats has also improved
greatly. A new Reopen Using Encoding sub-menu in the File menu allows
you to manually specify the text encoding for a given file. Thus, if you
open a file saved using Windows Latin 1 encoding, but BBEdit displays it
as Mac Roman, you can easily reopen the file with the proper encoding.
With BBEdit 7, you needed to close the file, then reopen it using the
Open dialog box, specifying the text encoding using a pop-up menu in the
dialog. There were other ways to do this ([Marc Liyanage’s character set
conversion Perl filters](http://www.entropy.ch/software/perl/) and the [Midex](http://www.barebones.com/support/bbedit/plugin_library.shtml#plugin_m10) BBEdit plug-in, for
example), but nothing as easy or graceful as the new Reopen Using
Encoding menu.


## Text Factories


BBEdit’s multi-file searching allows BBEdit to act as a production tool
for batch processing many files at once. Sure, it’s nothing a short Perl
or Python script couldn’t do — but if you think everyone can or should
learn to program, you’re missing the point.


But there’s only so much a single search/replace can do. It’s great if
you need to something simple, like changing the copyright date across a
few thousand HTML files. But if you need to string together multiple
replacements, it’s no longer a one-step process.


Enter “[Text Factories](http://www.barebones.com/products/bbedit/benefitsexercise.shtml#TextFactories)”. A Text Factory is a new type of document
that contains a list of one or more actions. You can easily add or
remove actions similar to the way you add/remove search criteria in the
Finder’s Find window: via ‘+’ and ‘-’ buttons next to each action. Text
Factories seems conceptually similar to the [Automator](http://www.apple.com/macosx/tiger/automator.html) feature coming
in Tiger.


Many of the commands in BBEdit’s Text menu are available as Factory
actions, as is the Search menu’s Replace All command. You can change
files’ encoding and line-ending style (Mac/Unix/DOS). And for anything
not covered by the built-in actions, you can also specify an AppleScript
or shell script (Perl, Python, Ruby, bash, etc.) as an action item.


You can execute a Text Factory against a single document window, but the
real power comes when batch processing files. If you regularly perform
the same repetitive actions against multiple files, a Text Factory might
be able to automate the entire process, without scripting.


And even if you’re comfortable with scripting — whether with
AppleScript or a shell language — Text Factories still might prove
useful for batch processing. If you write your script to serve as a Text
Factory action, the script only needs to be concerned with processing
the text of a single file at a time, saving you from writing code to
recurse folders and loop through, open, and save files — which I
consider a minor pain in the ass even in Perl.


Multi-file Text Factory processing can also take advantage of the same
file filtering mechanism used in BBEdit’s multi-file searching, making
it easy to limit Factory processing based on attributes such as file
names, modification dates, and labels.


One obvious improvement for the future would be to allow Text Factories
to be saved as “droplets” — small applications that you can drag files
and folders to in the Finder. Adobe Photoshop and ImageReady allow their
actions to be saved as droplets, and it’s a convenient way to invoke
them when processing multiple files at once.


## Multi-File Searching


Speaking of multi-file searching, BBEdit’s mighty Find dialog has
received a makeover. Turning on multi-file searching now opens a drawer
on the left side of the dialog. The drawer contains a list of search
targets: all open documents, recently-searched folders, and every HTML
Web Site configured in BBEdit’s preferences. It’s better-organized and
more convenient than the pop-up menus it replaces.


Plus, multi-file searches now run in their own thread, which means that
searches can run in the background while you continue to work in BBEdit.
Even though most searches I run take only a few seconds to run, it’s a
nice improvement when I do run a lengthy search.


## Codeless Language Modules


I mentioned this feature previously, when I released my [Apache
Configuration](http://daringfireball.net/projects/apacheconfig) language module. Out of all the new features in 8,
this is probably the one that most deserves a response of “It’s about
time.” Prior to version 8, language modules for BBEdit needed to be
compiled plug-ins written in C/C++. The advantage to this is that
BBEdit’s compiled language modules are both powerful and very fast. The
disadvantage is that most people aren’t willing or able to create them
on their own.


Most text editors follow the opposite approach, and *only* support
languages modules in a plain text format. Now that BBEdit supports both,
it should provide a best-of-both-worlds experience.


However, BBEdit 8.0’s codeless language module mechanism currently has a
few shortcomings. It’s more than a little biased toward programming
languages, with good support for things like functions, string
delimiters, and keywords. What it’s not so good for are markup
languages. (Like, say, Markdown.) The current CLM mechanism has no
concept of things such as tags, and it doesn’t allow for using regex
patterns to match language constructs.


Nor does it allow for embedding one language within another, the way
BBEdit’s built-in language module for HTML supports inline chunks of
other languages, such as PHP, ASP, and CSS.


## Plug-ins


Speaking of compiled plug-ins, BBEdit 8 now supports plug-ins compiled
using Xcode (i.e. Mach-O binaries). Previously, BBEdit required plug-ins
to be CFM binaries, which effectively meant they had to be compiled in
CodeWarrior. This restriction pretty much eliminated hobbyist-level
plug-in development, combined with the fact that many of the
text-munging tasks tackled with plug-ins a decade ago are now much more
easily written in Perl or Python. BBEdit 8 still supports old-style CFM
plug-ins, with the sole restriction that it no longer supports plug-ins
that aren’t Unicode aware.


Also, a bunch of plug-ins that used to ship with BBEdit are now built-in
commands in the Text menu: Add/Remove Line Numbers, Prefix/Suffix Lines,
Sort Lines, Process Duplicate Lines, and Process Lines Containing. This,
combined with the fact that other third-party plug-ins have been
obsoleted by other new features in 8.0, has left me with zero plug-ins
(other than language modules). Examples of obsoleted plug-ins: BBTidy
(HTML Tidy is now available via BBEdit’s Markup menu) and Midex (no
longer necessary thanks to the aforementioned Reopen Using Encoding
sub-menu). I had a plug-in I wrote years ago for myself but never
released, Stupefy Quotes, which has been obsoleted by the new Straighten
Quotes command in the Text menu.


I’m be interested to see whether support for Xcode spurs a surge in
plug-in and compiled language module development. I’m guessing no for
plug-ins — Unix Filters have eaten their lunch — but yes for compiled
language modules.


## Support Files


By dropping Mac OS 9 support, BBEdit is now able to fully support
OS-X-style conventions for supporting files:

- The application support folder is now named “BBEdit” instead of
“BBEdit Support”. More importantly, it now supports proper domain
layering, by which I mean that you can put a “BBEdit” support folder
in `/Library/Application Support/`, and it will be available to any
users on the machine running BBEdit. But each user can also have
their own BBEdit support folder in the Application Support folder in
their user Library folder, and the items therein will be used in
addition to those from the top-level Library folder.
- Custom keystroke shortcuts assigned to items such as AppleScripts,
Glossary items, and Unix filters are no longer stored in the
resource forks of each individual file. Instead, custom keystrokes
are stored separately from the files, in a similar way as the custom
menu key shortcuts for regular menu items. One reason for this is
that users might not have sufficient privileges to write to the
files in the top-level Library folder. Another is that it makes it
possible for BBEdit to do a better job identifying and preventing
keystroke conflicts.
- BBEdit now uses OS X’s built-in preferences system. Thus there’s
now a ‘com.barebones.bbedit.plist’ file containing your preference
data, and, if necessary, you can set or check preference values
using the `defaults` command-line tool — or you can hack a copy of
plist file using BBEdit itself. There’s also a
‘com.barebones.bbedit.PreferenceData’ folder (named as such so that it
sorts next to the regular preferences file in the Finder), containing
user preferences that aren’t saved in the regular prefs file —
including saved grep patterns, file filters, and S/FTP bookmarks.


## Document State


Document state is text-file-specific metadata; for BBEdit, this includes
things like the position and size of the window, the position of the
scrollbar, the current text selection range, and the text encoding used
to save the file. In all previous versions of BBEdit, state data was
stored in the resource fork of each document. This technique was
pioneered, I believe, by MPW (and BBEdit’s state resources were a
superset of MPW’s).


This scheme was quite clever, and worked exceedingly well in the old Mac
OS world. The only thing *essential* is the actual text of the document,
which was stored in the data fork. By stashing state info in the
resource fork, you could preserve it by passing it from one
resource-fork-savvy medium to another. Send it to someone on Windows or
Unix, and the state data would be lost, but the actual text in the data
fork would be unaffected.


In the new world of Mac OS X, however, storing state data in resource
forks has significant downsides. For one thing, resource forks don’t
survive the roundtrip through version control systems such as CVS or
Subversion. It also causes problems with files are stored on file
systems that don’t support multiple forks, such as WebDAV or UFS.


For those reasons and others, BBEdit 8 has switched to an entirely new
system for storing document state. Instead of storing state data inside
each file, you get a single preference file that contains the state info
for every file you edit. It’s stored in a new file inside
com.barebones.bbedit.PreferenceData: “Document State.plist”.


This solves all of the aforementioned problems with resource fork state
info — you can commit a file into CVS, check out a new revision, and
your state settings for that document will be preserved. If you work
with multiple collaborators on the same set of files in a CVS
repository, each of you can maintain your own state settings for each
file.


This is not to say there aren’t downsides to the new system. The new
centralized state database is fragile — it references individual files
by, of all things, a hardcoded pathname. Thus if you rename or move a
file, BBEdit loses track of its state. Move it back and the state
settings come back.


This is clearly a trade-off. For anyone who works in a cross-platform
environment or depends upon non-resource-fork-savvy tools, the new
system clearly works better. However, for anyone for whom resource fork
state storage did not pose a problem, the new system may not work
as well, particularly for anyone accustomed to state persisting when you
rename, move, or copy the file.


## Other Miscellaneous Improvements Based on Mac OS X Technology

- BBEdit now optionally supports running pages through the Apache web
server on your own machine before previewing them. Thus you can
preview PHP-powered pages, and the preview will show the actual
PHP-rendered output. There’s a world-class web server on every copy
of Mac OS X, why *not* use it?
[**Update:** [Jerry Kindall points out](http://www.jerrykindall.com/2004/09/02_bbedit_80.asp) that the local preview
server doesn’t need to be running on your machine — it could be any
server which you can mount as a volume via filesharing (SMB,
AppleShare, WebDAV). Thus members of a team working off a shared
staging server can all preview the pages they’re working on “live”
using the staging server. Very cool.]
- BBEdit now uses Mac OS X’s built-in spelling checker. The advantage
isn’t that the system’s spelling checker is particular great, but
that BBEdit’s old built-in checker was rather clumsy and annoyingly
modal. BBEdit doesn’t yet support check-as-you-type, but it does use
the standard Spelling palette, and nicely underlines misspelled
words in the document window itself. (The system’s Spelling palette
inexplicably doesn’t have a Correct All button, and so neither does
BBEdit. I hope this gets fixed, either by Apple in 10.4 or by Bare
Bones in a future update to BBEdit.)
- BBEdit now uses the system’s Fonts panel for choosing the display
font and tab width of the current document.


## Other Details Worth Mentioning

- In addition to the `bbedit` command-line tool that started shipping
with BBEdit 6.5, BBEdit introduces a `bbdiff` tool for comparing the
contents of files and folders. This completely obsoletes the [Perl
script of the same name](http://daringfireball.net/projects/bbdiff) I slapped together two years ago.
Bare Bones’ new tool does the same things as my script, plus more.
- BBEdit 8 introduces several new text color preferences, including
an option to subtly highlight the current line. It also allows you to
specify custom colors for the selection highlight, independent of
the system-wide setting set in System Prefs — this is useful if you
decide to use a dark background with light text.
- When BBEdit’s Balance While Typing option is on, you get a brief
notification whenever you type an unbalanced closing parenthesis,
bracket, or smart quote. In the old Mac OS, this notification took
the form of briefly flashing the menu bar at the top of the screen.
Easy to notice, but subtle enough so as not to be annoying. On Mac
OS X, however, the API call that flashed the menu bar under Mac OS 9
and earlier does something different: it briefly flashes the entire
screen. Definitely noticeable, and in many BBEdit users’ opinion,
*too* noticeable.
BBEdit 8 offers a much more OS-X-like notification: a transparent
status window that fades in and out (similar to the ones the system
displays when you change the volume or display brightness).

In an exceedingly nice touch, if the unmatched character is itself a
smart quote, BBEdit uses straight quotes to delimit the character in
the notification message.


## Pricing and Discounts


The price for a new license has been raised to $199, but through the end
of October, BBEdit 8 remains available for the old price of $179.
Upgrades from version 7 are $49, and upgrades from *any* previous
version are only $59. Plus, BBEdit’s long-standing “cross-grade”
discount remains: owners of Dreamweaver, GoLive, and BBEdit Lite can
purchase BBEdit for only $129. (Yes, BBEdit Lite, which was available
free of charge. No I don’t have something in my eye — I’m *wink*ing.)


## Comments Elsewhere

- [Michael Tsai](http://mjtsai.com/blog/2004/08/30/bbedit-8/)
- [Jonathan ‘Wolf’ Rentzsch](http://rentzsch.com/notes/bbedit8)



| **Previous:** | [MSN Music ‘iPod’ Help Page Updated Again](https://daringfireball.net/2004/09/msn_music_ipod_update) |
| **Next:** | [Opening Files Together in a New BBEdit Text Window](https://daringfireball.net/2004/09/bbedit_open_together) |


PreviousNext