---
title: "The Art of the Parlay, Or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying About Platform Licensing and Market Share"
date: 2004-08-07
url: https://daringfireball.net/2004/08/parlay
slug: parlay
word_count: 3778
---


Toss it back and forth long enough and a nugget of conventional
wisdom eventually comes to be treated as fact. With regard to Apple
and the Macintosh, the prime example is the idea that Apple made a
catastrophic error in the 1980s by not licensing the Macintosh.


This idea has been repeated so often by so many sources that today,
most people, even Mac users, simply accept it at face value: *If only
Apple had licensed the Macintosh, they could have been Microsoft.*


But this is not a fact. It’s conjecture, and barring a time machine,
it can never be proven. But even if you *could* go back to 1984 and
show Apple’s then-executives a glimpse of the future and the Mac’s
eventual market share — merely “licensing” the Mac very likely
would not have made a difference. In fact, in an alternate universe
where Apple had licensed the Macintosh or Mac OS in the mid-80s,
things could have ended up *worse* for Apple, as in
bankrupt-and-out-of-business worse.


There are a few simple reasons why nearly everyone thinks Apple
could have conquered the PC industry had they licensed the Mac:

- The Macintosh was indisputably years ahead of every other PC
platform in terms of user-interface design. The mouse pointer.
The desktop metaphor. Overlapping windows. Icons. WYSIWYG word
processing. Ten years later, every desktop computer in the world
offered similar features; but in 1984, they were only on the Mac.
- Apple licensed neither the Mac hardware nor software.
- Microsoft licensed MS-DOS, and later Windows, to any
IBM-compatible PC manufacturer who was willing to pay for a
license.
- At a basic conceptual level, from a user’s perspective,
Windows works pretty much like the Mac OS.
- It’s generally agreed that the first version of Windows that
didn’t suck shipped in 1995, a decade after the arrival of the
Mac.
- Apple matured into a modestly profitable computer company.
Macs account for about 5 percent of the computers in the U.S.,
and 2 percent world-wide.
- Microsoft became the most fabulously profitable and successful
corporation in the history of the world. Over 90 percent of the
computers in the world run some version of Windows.


Given these facts, it’s not hard to see how the conventional wisdom
came to be. *Apple had a 5-10 year lead in terms of UI design; if
only they’d licensed the Mac OS in the 80s…*


But we need to stop right here, because if we want to be realistic,
if we want to be even vaguely rigorous while playing this particular
game of “What If?”, then we need to clarify exactly *what* Apple
could have licensed in the mid-80s.


*The operating system, of course*, we might decide — because that’s
what Microsoft did, and they made tens of billions of dollars doing
so.


But except Apple couldn’t just license the “Mac OS” (which wasn’t
called “Mac OS” until the mid-90s) in 1984, because there weren’t
any computers that could use it. Much of the original Mac operating
system was implemented in [ROM](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ROM), as hardware. The Mac’s designers
didn’t do this to tie the operating system to Apple’s proprietary
hardware — they did this because it was necessary in terms of
price, performance, and the meager memory and storage they had
available. Each 400 KB floppy disk had to store the System (to boot
the Mac), whatever apps you wanted to run, and your data files.
Every KB of the Mac Toolbox in ROM freed up another KB of space on
your floppy disks.


Or consider the display. The Mac’s GUI depended on a 512-by-342
pixel monochrome display, capable of displaying text in the novel
color scheme of black text on a white background. This, at a time
when PC displays were typically used as character-based terminals
displaying orange or green type on a black background, and displayed
only 320-by-240 pixels. [**Correction:** 320×*200* with four colors, 
or 640 × 200 monochrome.]


In short, what were then called IBM-compatible PCs were technically
incapable of providing a user experience even vaguely resembling
that of the Macintosh. Apple could not have simply licensed the “Mac
OS” to run on any existing personal computer platform. (Including
their own wildly-successful Apple II platform; more on this later.)


Thus Apple couldn’t have merely licensed the operating system in the
mid-80s. *OK, then they should have licensed the entire platform to
other hardware manufacturers.* Admittedly this was possible, and,
according to [Jim Carlton’s Apple book](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/asin/0887309658/ref=nosim/daringfirebal-20), was exactly what
Apple’s executives considered but rejected. (Carlton’s book is
seriously flawed in many ways [not the least of which his conclusion
that the company was on the verge of going out of business circa
1999], but it’s worth reading if taken with several grains of salt.)
The idea was that Apple would license the Mac platform to a handful
of big-name companies like Kodak, Motorola, and AT&T — not a
wide-open licensing scheme where any company could decide to start
making Mac clones.


Obviously, the idea was ultimately rejected. Apple was earning
startlingly high profit margins on Mac hardware at the time, and
they didn’t want to share. The competition from licensing clearly
would have driven margins down, but the potential for increased
volume could have driven overall profits up. Would it have worked?
Maybe — but even in hindsight it can’t be deemed a sure thing.
Claiming that it “definitely” would have worked is bluster. It was
not at all a sure thing, and more to the point at hand, it was not
all like the software-only licensing plan that turned Microsoft into
a goliath.


So what’s left in our bag of hypothetical “license the Mac in the
’80s” scenarios? Most quote-unquote “business analysts” — who are
in large part responsible for the “Apple should have licensed the
Mac” conventional wisdom — argue that Apple should have moved away
from the hardware business entirely. Surely you’ve heard it argued
that Apple ought to become “a software company”, by which what
analysts really mean is “a company just like Microsoft”.


The idea being that the Mac’s relatively low market share, in the
face of its superior usability and design, is because the corporate
market was and is resistant to buying proprietary hardware. And so
thus Apple should have developed and licensed a version of the Mac
OS that ran on Intel PC hardware. Then you do a little hand-waving,
and boom — Apple could have been Microsoft.


The first problem with this idea, as stated earlier, is that
IBM-compatible PCs simply weren’t capable of providing a Mac-like
user experience in 1984, and it was many years later until they
were. And by the time PCs *were* capable providing a Mac-like
experience, Microsoft’s MS-DOS was already entrenched as the
monopoly OS.


The second problem is that it’s based on the dubious assumption that
the corporate IT market is innately resistant to proprietary
single-vendor hardware platforms, but has no reluctance whatsoever
to tie themselves to proprietary single-vendor software platforms.
That the corporate market has in large part chosen an open hardware
platform (x86 processor IBM-compatible PCs) and a closed software
platform (DOS/Windows) is quite possibly just the way things turned
out, not necessarily the way things were destined to be.


My explanation is simply that the corporate market went with
IBM-compatible machines at the start of the PC revolutions because
that seemed like the safest route. “No one ever got fired for
choosing IBM” was the IT mantra of the ’70s and ’80s. Every
subsequent step from that point onward was simply the path of least
resistance. Switching to the Mac — or any other different hardware
platform for that matter — would have been risky and expensive.
It’s easier to do what everyone else is doing, and it’s easier to
stick with what you already have.


If the purpose behind these hypothetical musings is to find a way
that Apple could have capitalized on the Mac to obtain a
significantly larger long-term PC market share, they would have had
to have done something different *early*. Even by the late ’80s,
they would have been playing catch-up against Microsoft.


And so what “analysts” are really saying Apple should have done is
not have made the Macintosh at all — but rather to have written a
GUI-based operating system compatible with the existing PCs of 1984.
This is a big enough “what if” that it certainly could have
significantly changed the course of computing history — but make no
mistake that such an operating system would have borne very little
resemblance indeed to the actual Macintosh we knew and loved.


And before you start nodding your head in *yes, yes, that’s what
Apple should have done* agreement, it’s essential to note that such
an endeavor would have turned Apple into a direct competitor to
Microsoft, in the market Microsoft deemed most essential to
dominate.


## SURGEON GENERAL’S WARNING: Competing Directly Against Microsoft May Be Hazardous to Your Company


Such a plan to license a GUI operating system to run on Intel PC
hardware may well have been Apple’s only and best chance to become
an industry colossus sitting atop a Scrooge-McDuck-style mountain of
gold, but that’s not to say it would have been a *good* chance.


The press — both mainstream and tech trade — long ago labeled
“Apple-vs.-Microsoft” as one of the biggest rivalries in the
industry. It’s not entirely fair to blame this solely on the press
— Apple’s infamous and ill-fated “look-and-feel” lawsuit against
Microsoft certainly fanned the flames.


But the truth is that Apple and Microsoft have seldom been direct
competitors. Microsoft’s overriding goal for the past 25 years has
been to develop and maintain an operating systems monopoly on the
IBM-compatible PC platform. Apple has never entered that market, and
therefore never threatened any of the markets Microsoft deemed
essential.


Apple has, of course, offered their own rival hardware platform. But
that’s indirect competition, not direct. Apple’s pitch has always
been that you should buy an Apple computer, not that you should
replace Microsoft’s OS with theirs. And I don’t think Microsoft has
ever considered the Macintosh a serious threat to the IBM PC
hardware platform.


Companies which compete directly against Microsoft have a tendency
to go out of business quickly and gruesomely.


There is only room for one PC operating systems monopoly. It’s
therefore much more likely that a plan from Apple to license a
Mac-like operating system for PCs — at any point in industry
history — would have resulted in Apple being crushed by Microsoft
than it is that Apple would have replaced Microsoft as the dominant
software vendor.


The truth is that there was no sure-fire way, even in hindsight, for
Apple to turn the Macintosh into a Windows-style monopoly. But what
we have arrived at is a more insightful analysis as to the key
difference between Apple’s and Microsoft’s strategies through the
’80s and ’90s.


The conventional wisdom holds that the difference is that Microsoft
went down the path of open licensing, whereas Apple chose to remain
proprietary. Both statements are true, but they’re not the key to
understanding the companies’ differences. That they ended up on
different sides of the open/proprietary divide is an effect, not the
cause.


The key difference is that Microsoft focused — intensely and
purposefully — on parlaying each of their successes into bigger
successes. They got lucky once, when they got IBM to agree to
license MS-DOS as the operating system for the IBM PC. (I say they
were “lucky” not to discount the shrewdness on the part of Bill
Gates and his then-colleagues, but simply because IBM so vastly
underestimated the importance of the OS.)


Microsoft parlayed their DOS command-line-era monopoly into the
Windows GUI-era monopoly, then parlayed their Windows monopoly into
the Office monopoly. In terms of Microsoft’s revenue and profits,
everything other than Windows and Office are negligible. And both
are entirely parlayed from MS-DOS.


Apple, on the other hand, seldom even *attempted* (let alone
succeeded) to parlay any of their successes into further successes.
The Apple II was a phenomenally successful platform. When you hear
people state that Apple used to possess 15 to 20 percent market
share in personal computers, they’re *not* talking about the Mac.
(Or if they are, they’re misinformed, which is likely.) It was the
Apple II that held such high market share, not the Mac.


According to Owen Linzmayer’s “[Apple Confidential](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/asin/1593270100/ref=nosim/daringfirebal-20)” [p. 19],
Apple’s revenue from the Macintosh didn’t surpass that from the
Apple II until 1986, and almost certainly would’ve taken even longer
if the Jobs-led management had not effectively abandoned the Apple
II platform — which they did not because the Apple II wasn’t
popular, but despite the fact that it *was* popular.


The Macintosh was neither based on nor compatible with the Apple II.
Neither platform could run software written for the other. The
result is that there was no particular way for an Apple II user to
switch to a Mac other than by buying all new hardware and all new
software. (There was an Apple II add-on card available for the Mac
LC in the early ’90s, but that was six or seven years after the Mac
debuted.)


Whether this was a mistake or not is impossible to say. It’s not
hyperbole to describe the original Macintosh as revolutionary — the
entire desktop-metaphor GUI was utterly unlike the character-based
terminal and command-line systems of the era. But that the Mac
offered no text mode or command-line — no `stdin`, no `stdout` —
wasn’t just artistic purity. If the Mac had offered such a mode,
even just as a secondary option behind the GUI, the temptation would
have been perhaps irresistible for third-party developers to write
character-based “Mac” software that wasn’t the least bit Mac-like at
all, but instead was pretty much just like the software they’d been
writing for DOS and the Apple II.


Since Apple provided no such mode, developers who wanted to write
software for the Macintosh *had* to write Mac-like software. But
other than carrying the Apple brand name, the Macintosh was
altogether dissimilar from the wildly popular Apple II. This was
good for users, but hard for developers. Writing Mac software was
both different and difficult.


In the ’90s, under John Sculley, Apple repeated this pattern of
building a new platform that stood apart from an existing, popular
platform with the Newton — and this time it clearly was a mistake.
The biggest problem with the Newton wasn’t the size, or the price,
or the initially piss-poor handwriting recognition. The biggest
problem is that it didn’t really have anything at all to do with the
Macintosh.


Yes, there was the Newton Connection Utility, which let you
synch/export/import some data from your Mac (or Windows PC) to a
Newton, and which you needed to use to install new and updated
software on the Newton. But it stunk. It was always evident that the
Newton was designed to stand alone; that their target was a future
when you wouldn’t need a desktop computer, just your personal
digital assistant. The biggest difference between the Palm Pilot and
the Newton wasn’t the smaller size or lower price — but that it
shipped with much more useful desktop software and better data
synching capabilities.


The Newton introduced numerous wonderful UI design concepts. You
never had to explicitly save or name anything; your notes, contacts,
and other data were all just there. It was enough to make [MPT weep
for joy](http://mpt.phrasewise.com/stories/storyReader$374). But it didn’t really do anything to take advantage
of the $3000 Mac on your desk. You couldn’t even mount it on your
desktop.


The Palm Pilot (and later, Microsoft’s Pocket PC (née WinCE)
platform) was designed and marketed as a computer peripheral,
parlaying off the success of the PC. The Newton was designed and
marketed not as a Mac or PC peripheral, but as the Next Big Thing,
technology that would *supplant* the personal computer, not
complement it. If the Newton had hooked to your Mac the way Palm
Pilots and Pocket PCs connected to PCs, it would have been much more
successful, possibly vastly so.


Apple’s goal should have been to make the Newton a must-have Mac
peripheral. Instead, by creating only tenuous ties between the Mac
and Newton, it was easily-done-without.


## It’s the Parlay, Stupid


Your not-so-humble business analysts state as fact that “the market”
favors open platforms. But is that really so? It’s hard not to be
blinded by the sun-like intensity of Microsoft’s staggering profits;
but if you set aside Microsoft’s DOS/Windows/Office monopoly, where
else is this adage proven?


Let’s look at console gaming platforms. Nintendo and Sony have built
successful platforms that are almost *completely* closed. Not only
do they build and sell their own proprietary hardware, but they
require third-party developers to obtain permission and to pay for
the privilege of selling games that run on their systems.


And so when Microsoft — patron saint of the “open platform”
business analysts — entered the console gaming market with the
Xbox, they licensed the hardware openly to other manufacturers, and
they allowed third-party games to run without licensing fees.


Right?


No, of course not. The Xbox is every bit as proprietary as
Nintendo’s and Sony’s gaming platforms.


I posit that the Windows monopoly is an anomaly, and exists only
because of IBM’s decision to license the DOS operating system from
Microsoft, rather than buying it or writing their own from scratch.
Microsoft didn’t choose or decide the “open” nature of the
IBM-compatible hardware business — they just went along for the
ride and then took full advantage of their fortunate position. (Cf.
Edison’s famous adage: “Opportunity is missed by most people because
it is dressed in overalls and looks like work;” Microsoft worked its
corporate ass off to build its monopolies.)


But so while these gaming platforms contradict the idea that the
market prefers open platforms — they reinforce the importance of
the parlay. Nintendo has parlayed their initial success with the NES
into a series of successful next-generation platforms: from NES to
Super Nintendo to Nintendo 64 to GameCube. While neither software
nor cartridge-compatible, each Nintendo platform was founded on the
same familiar series of Nintendo-branded games and characters.


Sony followed up their initial success with the PlayStation with
PlayStation II — a system that plays original PlayStation games,
the ultimate compatibility parlay.


And the Xbox, although Microsoft’s initial foray into console
gaming, is very much a parlay. Not off another console, but off PC
gaming. The Xbox hardware is quite a bit similar to Wintel PC
hardware, and the Xbox programming APIs for game developers are very
much similar to those of Windows. I.e., Microsoft has made it easy
for PC game developers to port to the Xbox.


Point being not that parlaying one successful platform into a new
one is easy, or that it doesn’t require hard work and clever
engineering, but simply that it’s easier and more likely to succeed
than a new platform built from scratch.


## Think Difference


Thus the difference between Microsoft and Apple wasn’t about
open-vs.-closed; it was pragmatism-vs.-idealism.


If Microsoft had been like Apple, Windows would have been something
totally new, divorced from and incompatible with MS-DOS. It would
have been much better — in the same way the Mac was “better” — but
quite probably much less popular.


If Apple had been like Microsoft, the Mac would have been built on
top of the Apple II platform and the Newton would have been designed
as a Macintosh peripheral.


But that’s not what happened. For about a decade, Windows was merely
a graphical shell process that ran on top of MS-DOS. Most PC “power
users” configured their machines to boot into a DOS command-line;
Windows only started after typing “win” at a command prompt. Even
after Microsoft moved Windows away from its DOS foundations, it
never abandoned DOS software compatibility, and never encouraged a
culture of strict enforcement to proper graphical user interface
guidelines.


The result is that a lot of early “Windows” software was just DOS
software that ran inside a window and provided a menu bar and few
clickable buttons. Or else it was flat-out pure DOS software running
inside a DOS compatibility window.


These decisions severely limited Windows, and crippled it in any
objective side-by-side comparison to a Mac.


But it allowed DOS users — most especially including the gazillions
of corporations that had bought IBM-compatible PCs — to migrate
from DOS to Windows slowly and incrementally.


No matter what computer you currently used — IBM PC or Apple II —
switching to the Mac meant buying all new hardware and all new
software.


I’m not saying this was a mistake; I offer it only as the
explanation as to why Apple earns millions per quarter while
Microsoft earns billions. But I don’t know that Apple should have
done very much different at all during the 80s and early 90s. The
real Mac was revolutionary; a hypothetical Mac based on the Apple II
would have been evolutionary.


That would have been the pragmatic approach, but Apple was an
idealistic company staffed by idealistic employees. Read the stories
about the development of the Mac at [Folklore.org](http://folklore.org/) and it’s hard
to imagine that team working on pragmatic, practical evolutionary
improvements to the Apple II platform.


It’s also essential to remember that the entire concept of the
personal computer was still relatively new in 1984. Something
brand-new, eschewing compatibility with existing software — was
something that had happened every few years until that point. It
wasn’t clear at all that a revolution like the original Macintosh
couldn’t take off and supersede all existing competitors.


The upshot and point of all this being that the Mac’s low market
share is quite possibly (and quite *probably* in my mind) unrelated
to Apple’s decision not to license the Macintosh; but rather the
result of their decision not to parlay off the success of the Apple
II. And that but if they *had* limited the “Macintosh” to what could
have been built upon the Apple II, or if the Mac had somehow offered
full compatibility with Apple II software, then what they’d have
built would have been something very different from what we know as
the original Mac.


We might have ended up with something merely “new and improved”,
which isn’t nearly as exciting as “insanely great”.



| **Previous:** | [The Perl Email Project](https://daringfireball.net/2004/08/perl_email) |
| **Next:** | [Things Unmentioned in the ‘Art of the Parlay’ Article, but of Which You Must Take My Word Were Left Out Because They Were Beside the Point, and Not Because I Was Unaware of Them](https://daringfireball.net/2004/08/things_unmentioned) |


PreviousNext