---
title: "Trusted"
date: 2005-08-06
url: https://daringfireball.net/2005/08/trusted
slug: trusted
word_count: 2487
---


It started with a forum thread and the following front-page blurb at
[OSx86](http://www.osx86.classicbeta.com/wiki/index.php/Main_Page), a site produced by people attempting to crack the Intel
version of Mac OS X to get it to run on non-Apple computers:


> We’ve discovered that Rosetta uses [TCPA/TPM DRM](http://www.osx86.classicbeta.com/wiki/index.php/TPM). Some
> parts of the GUI like ATSServer are still not native to x86 —
> meaning that Rosetta is required by the GUI, which in turn
> requires TPM. See the forum topic [here](http://osx86.classicbeta.com/forum/viewtopic.php?t=71).


“TPM” stands for Trusted Platform Module, an industry standard
hardware chip that provides for “trusted computing”. There’s an
industry consortium, the [Trusted Computing Group](https://www.trustedcomputinggroup.org/home), whose
[primary promoters](https://www.trustedcomputinggroup.org/about/members/members) are AMD, HP, IBM, Intel, Microsoft, Sony,
and Sun.


The whole “trusted computing” thing is highly controversial. The
Wikipedia, as usual, has a fine overview, [covering both what trusted
computing is, and why it’s controversial](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trusted_computing):


> **Trusted computing** is a term coined by the TCPA referring to
> the goal of their family of open specifications to make
> computers more secure through the use of dedicated hardware.
> Critics, including academics, security experts, and users of
> free and open source software, contend, however, that the
> overall effect (and perhaps intent) of trusted computing is to
> impose unreasonable restrictions on how people can use their
> computers.


The Wikipedia also has a short entry on [TPM](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trusted_Platform_Module).


The gist of the situation, reportedly, is that at least some portions
of the Intel Developer Transition Kit version of Mac OS X are strung
up in such a way that depends upon the TPM module on the Transition
Kit motherboard. I say “reportedly” because I can’t say for certain
there is in fact such a module on the motherboard, because I don’t
have a Developer Transition Kit, and even if I did, I’d be under an
NDA that would prevent me from discussing it. But I think it’s safe to
assume these reports are true.


The effect of this, surprise surprise, is that the version of Mac OS X
that ships with the Developer Kit hardware only runs on Apple’s
Developer Kit Hardware. Which state of affairs is exactly what Apple
stated, clearly and publicly, when they announced the transition at
WWDC in June. What Apple hasn’t stated publicly is *how*, technically,
they were going to keep Mac OS X compiled for x86 from running on
non-Apple x86 computers. The TPM chip is, apparently, at least part of
the answer.


It’s hard to see how this news is surprising to anyone. Given (a) that
Apple has stated, adamantly, that Mac OS X will only run on Apple
hardware; and (b) that despite a lot of effort and a lot of interest,
no one has been able to get the Developer Kit Mac OS X release to run
on non-Apple hardware; it seems rather obvious that the Developer Kit
boxes contain some sort of hardware that the software is tied to. This
affects no one other than those who hope to install bootleg copies of
Mac OS X on their x86 PCs.1


And so ends the reality-based portion of the saga.


## Tin Foil Hat Country


On Monday, the [story was picked up by Slashdot](http://apple.slashdot.org/article.pl?sid=05/08/01/0421248), with the
following submission blurb:


> Several people have [discovered](http://www.osx86.classicbeta.com/wiki/index.php/Main_Page) that the new Intel
> kernel Apple has included with the [Developer Kit DVD](http://www.tuxtalk.org/files/phenix.nfo)
> uses [TCPA/TPM DRM](http://www.osx86.classicbeta.com/wiki/index.php/TPM). More specifically, it includes “a
> TCPA/Palladium implementation that uses a [Infineon 1.1](http://www.appleinsider.com/image.php?i=appledevkit1&id=1146)
> chip which will prevent certain parts of the OS from working
> unless authorized.


From here, we go to Cory Doctorow, who, after reading the “news” on
Slashdot, penned a scathing diatribe on Boing Boing, titled, “[Apple
to add Trusted Computing to the new kernel?](http://www.boingboing.net/2005/07/31/apple_to_add_trusted.html)”. It starts:


> People working with early versions of the forthcoming
> Intel-based MacOS X operating system have discovered that
> Apple’s new kernel makes use of Intel’s Trusted Computing
> hardware. If this “feature” appears in a commercial, shipping
> version of Apple’s OS, they’ll lose me as a customer — I’ve
> used Apple computers since 1979 and have a Mac tattooed on my
> right bicep, but this is a deal-breaker.


First, it seems a bit euphemistic to describe people trying to crack
Mac OS X to run on non-Apple x86 hardware as “people working with
early versions of the forthcoming Intel-based MacOS [*sic*] X
operating system”. “People working with” creates the impression that
these are legitimate developers, expressing legitimate concerns.


Doctorow continues:


> I travel in the kinds of circles where many people use
> GNU/Linux on their computers — and not only use it, but
> actually call it GNU/Linux instead of just “Linux,” in the
> fashion called for by Richard Stallman. Some of these people
> give me grief over the fact that I use Mac OS X instead of
> GNU/Linux on my Powerbook, because the MacOS is proprietary.


There is a word for these people. That word is *asshole*. No, wait,
*zealot*. OK, there are two words for these people.


> When my free software companions give me grief over this, I
> tell them that I’m using an OS built on a free flavor of Unix,
> and that most of the apps I use are likewise free — such as
> Firefox, my terminal app, etc.
> Here’s the important part though: when I use apps that aren’t
> free, like Apple’s Mail.app, BBEdit, NetNewsWire, etc, I do so
> comfortable in the fact that they save their data-files in free
> *formats*, open file-formats that can be read by free or
> proprietary applications. That means that I always retain the
> power to switch apps when I need to.


Here at least, Doctorow makes complete sense. Indeed, open,
interchangeable file formats are much more important than free
software.2 Best are apps that
directly read and write to open formats; good enough are apps that
import from and export to open formats.3


But then he enters tin foil hat country:


> The point of Trusted Computing is to make it hard — impossible,
> if you believe the snake-oil salesmen from the Trusted Computing
> world — to open a document in a player other than the one that
> wrote it in the first place, unless the application vendor
> authorizes it. It’s like a blender that will only chop the food
> that Cuisinart says you’re allowed to chop. It’s like a car that
> will only take the brand of gas that Ford will let you fill it
> with. It’s like a web-site that you can only load in the browser
> that the author intended it to be seen in.


Certainly such a scenario is *a* potential use of Trusted Computing
DRM mechanisms — and such a scenario would indeed be dreadful — but
it’s a far stretch to call it *the* “point of Trusted Computing”. In
the actual case here, Apple’s Developer Transition Kits  — which,
I’ll remind you, [may bear *zero* resemblance](http://lists.apple.com/archives/Darwin-drivers/2005/Jun/msg00020.html), internally or
externally, to the actual Intel-powered computers Apple will
eventually ship to real customers — are (reportedly) using TPM for
one and only one purpose: to prevent the OS from being run on
non-Apple hardware.


There is no indication, none, zero, not even a whiff, that Apple
intends to enable, let alone encourage, developers to create software
with the TPM file-access authorization-locking described by Doctorow
above. None.


This is not about third-party software developers limiting access to
*your* data. This is about Apple limiting access to *their* operating
system.


Even if you ignore the fact that there isn’t any evidence, just
*think* about it. What motivation would Apple have for allowing or
encouraging this sort of lock-in? Ever since the transition to Mac OS
X, Apple has been moving in the direction of openness, releasing the
entire low-level OS core as open source, bending over backwards for
compatibility with Windows wherever possible — and but now they’re
going to allow for this? It boggles the mind.


Or consider iTunes, the most prominent software from Apple that makes
use of DRM. The DRM in iTunes doesn’t add any restrictions to music
you already own. Apple went to bat *for* users’ rights with the ITMS,
getting better rights and lower pricing (for hit singles at least)
than what the record labels wanted to offer. And if you still don’t
like the ITMS DRM policies — which is a perfectly reasonable stance
— you can simply not use the ITMS and still be a happy iTunes / iPod
user.


Back to Doctorow:


> What this means is that “open formats” is no longer meaningful.
> An application can write documents in “open formats” but use
> Trusted Computing to prevent competing applications from
> reading them.


This is completely wrong. The existence of a TPM chip on the
motherboard does not mean that application developers will be able to
create apps which can produce files which can only be opened in the
app that created the file. You’d need operating system support for
that, including a way to prevent files from being copied to other
computers, and adding a feature like this to the OS would be suicidal.
In what way could such a capability possibly be construed as
beneficial to users? And, I repeat, there is no evidence whatsoever
that Apple plans to do this.


If a file is written to disk in an open format, no TPM chip can
prevent you from opening it in another program. And if your data is
written to disk in an encrypted format, with the decryption keys tied
TPM hardware outside your control — then your software is clearly not
writing to an “open format”.


> Apple may never implement this in their own apps (though I’ll
> be shocked silly if it isn’t used in iTunes and the DVD
> player), but Trusted Computing in the kernel is like a rifle on
> the mantelpiece: if it’s present in act one, it’ll go off by
> act three.


No one has ever claimed that copy-protected DVDs are an “open format”,
nor has Apple ever claimed that DRM-protected music from ITMS is an
“open format”. The whole point of the DRM is that the formats *aren’t*
open. These restrictions aren’t from Apple, they’re from the
entertainment industry. Even if they wanted to, Apple couldn’t sell
non-DRM protected major-record-label music from the ITMS, nor could
they ship a version of DVD Player which allowed you to, say, export
video from a commercial DVD to an unprotected QuickTime movie.


If you’re not happy with these restrictions in iTunes and DVD Player,
blame the entertainment industry. Again, I see no reason to believe
that Apple is interested in making these restrictions even more
onerous than they already are.


> So that means that if Apple carries on down this path, I’m
> going to exercise my market power and switch away, and, for the
> first time since 1979, I won’t use an Apple product as my main
> computer. I may even have my tattoo removed.


Down *what* path, though? Down the path where individual Mac apps
start using TPM-enabled DRM to prevent you from opening your files
with other applications? Well, duh, if Apple does that, nearly *every*
Mac user will be in line for a new brand of computer.


Or is the mere presence of a bogeyman TPM chip on the motherboard,
which chip is used as nothing more than a dongle that ties Mac OS X to
Apple-sanctioned hardware, enough to count as “carr[ying] on down this
path”? If that’s the case, Doctorow might as well start packing his
bag.


It’ll be interesting to see what platform Doctorow switches to.
Windows is seemingly out of the question, considering that Windows
Vista is slated to contain [numerous TPM-based security features](http://www.microsoft.com/windowsvista/basics/security.mspx).


But he can always switch to GNU/Linux, right? Actually, wrong —
because the [Linux kernel has driver support for TPM, too](http://www.kernel.org/git/?p=linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux-2.6.git;a=tree;h=1f233708d94fe4b2fe88ad1db8c97189f2349c08;hb=02459eaab98a6a57717bc0cacede148fc76af881;f=drivers/char/tpm). Go
ahead and look at the [source code](http://www.kernel.org/git/?p=linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux-2.6.git;a=blob;h=0e3241645c1907651612dccdbcdbad678c21f36a;hb=02459eaab98a6a57717bc0cacede148fc76af881;f=drivers/char/tpm/tpm_infineon.c) of
`drivers/char/tpm/tpm_infineon.c`, which starts:


```
/*
 * Description:
 * Device Driver for the Infineon Technologies
 * SLD 9630 TT Trusted Platform Module
 * Specifications at www.trustedcomputinggroup.org

```


I suppose he could compile his own version of the Linux kernel minus
any support for TPM, but the wiser course would be to realize that TPM
support, in and of itself, is no more or less evil than support for
any other chips on a motherboard.


## Decency


When I told a few friends this week that I planned to write about
Doctorow’s outburst, several indicated that I shouldn’t bother, more
or less on the grounds that Doctorow deserves to be cut a bit of slack
because his heart is in the right place. The idea being, *OK, sure,
he’s out of line in complaining about this, but at least he’s just
looking out for users’ rights.*


But the fact that his intentions are good doesn’t make it right to let
this pass. Doctorow is clearly ascribing deviousness onto Apple,
without a single shred of evidence to back it up. But anyone who knows
him as both an Apple aficionado and a champion of users’s rights, and
who trusts his opinions on such matters, is going to take away from
this the idea that Apple is doing something malicious, and that bad
things are likely to start happening with users’ data on Intel-powered
Mac systems.


The idea that Doctorow’s critique, despite being unfounded, was good
for the community simply because of its anti-DRM slant is like
saying McCarthyism was good for the country simply because of its
anti-Communist slant.


Yet here we are, with [Tim O’Reilly calling Doctorow’s post “a great
rant”](http://radar.oreilly.com/archives/2005/08/great_rant_by_c.html):


> In his usual lucid way, Cory goes on to explain why open data is
> more important than free software, and how the proposed DRM cuts
> to the heart of the essential freedom to switch to another
> program, or another computer. Well worth a read.


Except that the only “proposed DRM” that would get in the way of any
“freedom to switch” exists only in completely fabricated scenarios
from Doctorow himself.


---

1. Which is not to say the Developer Kit release of Mac OS X is uncrackable. No software is uncrackable. What we know, though, is that it isn’t easily crackable.
↩
2. Although it’s arguable whether Apple Mail’s new .emlx file format counts as “open”. It is a plain text format — more or less an RFC822 mail message followed by plist-format XML data — but the [flags in the plist data are undocumented](http://www.livejournal.com/users/jwz/505711.html).
↩
3. This is one of several reasons why few people are shedding tears over the continuing demise of StuffIt — the .sit and .sitx file formats are completely proprietary; no software other than StuffIt can unpack a .sit archive.
↩



| **Previous:** | [Notes on Notes](https://daringfireball.net/2005/08/notes_on_notes) |
| **Next:** | [Star Star](https://daringfireball.net/2005/08/star_star) |


PreviousNext