---
title: "Star Star"
date: 2005-08-11
url: https://daringfireball.net/2005/08/star_star
slug: star_star
word_count: 740
---


For most of the 14 months or so that I’ve been publishing the [Linked
List](http://daringfireball.net/linked/), I’ve been using small stars as the permalink markers for each
entry. Instead of small graphic images for the markers, I use a
Unicode HTML entity: `&#9733;`, a.k.a. **Black Star**.


They’re supposed to look like this:


However, when viewed using Safari on my new Mac Mini (running a
stock installation of 10.4.2, with no third-party fonts, and all
of the fonts that shipped with the Mini enabled), they looked like
this:


My first thought was that it must be a problem with my CSS, that I’d
somehow introduced a bug that caused the `permalink` class to be
rendered too small. But after bumping up the font size a few clicks I
could see that it wasn’t even the correct star shape — it’s a less
angular, more childish star:


Testing on a few different Macs, all running Safari 2.0 and Mac OS X
10.4.2, produced inconsistent results. Some displayed the stars as
intended, others didn’t. With [Camino](http://caminobrowser.org/) and Firefox, however, the stars
displayed correctly on every system. Only in Safari did the results
vary.


Most of the characters in the Unicode character set aren’t represented
in most typefaces; so, when you ask for one of them and the “current
font” has no glyph to represent the character, the system uses an
appropriate glyph from a font that *does* represent the character.
Common text fonts like Helvetica, Times, Georgia, and Verdana (my text
font here at Daring Fireball) don’t have built-in glyphs for the
`&#9733;` star.


So, I copied the star character displayed in Safari and pasted it into
TextEdit. I then opened the Fonts palette to see which font was being
used to display the glyph. On the systems where it displayed
correctly, the font for the star was Hiragino Kaku Gothic Pro, a
Japanese sans serif.1 On the systems
where it displayed incorrectly, the font was Mshtakan, an Armenian
typeface.


So, the problem is that when Mshtakan is available, and the “current
font” doesn’t contain the black star glyph, Web Kit uses the (ugly)
glyph from Mshtakan rather than (correct) glyph from Hiragino Kaku
Gothic.


The problem probably isn’t Web Kit’s fault, though. Using the
Character Palette, if you insert a black star in TextEdit while using
a font that doesn’t contain the glyph, you’ll get the star from
Mshtakan (if Mshtakan is available). What sucks about this is that of
all the fonts that contain a glyph for this character,2 Mshtakan is the only font that could be
considered a poor choice.


The star varies slightly in size depending on the font (it’s a little
smaller in Zapf Dingbats, for example), but only in Mshtakan is it
significantly smaller, and only in Mshtakan is it a differently-shaped
star.


## Goat’s Head Soup


The workaround was simple: in my CSS, I now ask for specific font
families for my `permalink` class:


```
font-family: "Hiragino Kaku Gothic Pro", "Osaka", "Zapf Dingbats";

```


Web Kit will now try to use the star from those fonts before resorting
to Mshtakan.


I’ve put together [this simple example to demonstrate](http://daringfireball.net/misc/2005/08/black_star_glyph.html) the problem.


Using Safari 2.0 on a 10.4.2 system with the Mshtakan font available,
it looks like this:


Using Safari 2.0 on a 10.4.2 system that doesn’t have Mshtakan, it
looks like this:


And using either Camino or Firefox, regardless if Mshtakan is
available, it looks like this:


Note that the Gecko renderer (used in both Camino and Firefox)
chooses the exact same star glyph, regardless of the specified font. I
consider this more desirable than Web Kit’s “I’ll show you different
stars depending on which fonts you have available” behavior.


## Update


If you turn on Safari’s “Use ATSU for All Text” option (via the [Debug
menu](http://www.macosxhints.com/article.php?story=20030110063041629)), Safari will display a proper star glyph by default, even when
Mshtakan is available:


(Thanks to [Matt Deatherage](http://macjournals.com/) for pointing this out.)


I can’t recommend turning Safari’s [ATSU](http://developer.apple.com/intl/atsui.html) rendering option on, however,
as it results in generally unsightly kerning.


Also, for the curious, [Nat Irons](http://bumppo.net/) sent the following screenshot
of the demo page as displayed by IE 6 running on Windows 2000:


Just lovely.


---

1. Hiragino Kaku Gothic is [apparently](http://70six.com/cgi-bin/shop.pl/page=mt0006.html) “Japan’s Helvetica”.
↩︎
2. If you look in the Font Variation section of the Character Palette, you can see every font that contains any particular character.
↩︎



| **Previous:** | [Trusted](https://daringfireball.net/2005/08/trusted) |
| **Next:** | [The GUIdebook Interview](https://daringfireball.net/2005/08/guidebook_interview) |


PreviousNext