---
title: "Goal"
date: 2006-05-09
url: https://daringfireball.net/2006/05/goal
slug: goal
word_count: 843
---


It’s been about three weeks since my “Initiative” announcement that
I’ve gone full-time with Daring Fireball. So far so good. The
response has been terrific, both in terms of [membership signups](http://daringfireball.net/members/)
and [t-shirt sales](http://daringfireball.net/members/shirts), and in terms of the absolutely staggering
amount of email I’ve gotten from readers wishing me good luck.
(Still catching up on that email, just from April 20 alone, in fact.
Almost there, though.)


I’ve added a small graph to the header of the site’s web pages to
track the growth in membership since my announcement. The graph is
small and mostly unlabeled, so in and of itself it’s probably rather
cryptic, and if someone showed it to Edward Tufte he’d probably
start crying.


Here’s an explanation that, I hope, should help you make sense of it:

- The graph shows membership revenue *since* my “I’m going full-time”
announcement on April 20. Actually, the graph starts on April 19,
the day I [announced the new t-shirts](http://daringfireball.net/2006/04/new_tshirts).
- The white sections of each bar show the revenue from that
particular day. You can see that the two biggest days, by
far, were the day of and day after my announcement. You can
also see that sales have tapered off in the last week.
(Just because you don’t see white on every day doesn’t mean
there weren’t *any* new signups or t-shirt orders — it just
means there weren’t enough to register as a pixel on a graph
this small.)
- The dotted line labeled “goal” is the number I hope to reach by
the end of this “membership drive”, which will be Friday, three
days from now. I.e. I’m hoping that by the end of the week, the
graph will reach (or even better, surpass) that line.


This goal is a somewhat arbitrary number that represents about
one-third of the total revenue I believe I need to make from Daring
Fireball to “make it” for the year. My basic plan is to make about
one-third of my income from membership and t-shirt sales, another
third from advertising, and the remainder from other initiatives in
the next few weeks and months.


As of this writing, it has leveled off at about the 80 percent mark,
which is already pretty good. If we don’t quite make it to the goal,
that’s OK. But if you’ve been thinking about supporting my efforts,
but have sort of wondered whether I’d already made so much money that
I spent my weekend yacht shopping, the truth is that I could still
use your help.


(I’m not going to sing you a sob story about how hard it is to
succeed with a small business like this, but keep in mind that I
need to foot the bill for significant expenses like health insurance
for my entire family.)


The graph is regenerated every 30 minutes or so; stay tuned to see
how it goes.


## Atoms vs. Bits


Just like in past membership drives, most of the revenue is coming
from t-shirt sales. At SXSW this year, I spoke on [a panel about
making money from weblogs](http://www.ok-cancel.com/archives/article/2006/03/blogging-for-money-by-learning-from-comics.html), and one of the main points I
emphasized is that people are more willing to spend money for atoms
than for bits. I.e. people will happily pay for things they can
actually hold in their hands, but you can’t touch ones and zeroes.


Despite the fact that the reason you fine readers are buying these
shirts is that you want to support my work, I don’t think I’d be
nearly as successful if I were only asking for donations or selling
memberships.


This isn’t criticism; it’s just an observation about human nature.
It’s why so many honest people aren’t at all reluctant to download
bootleg media files from file-sharing services. I see it in myself,
too. When The New York Times put their op-ed columnists behind a
for-pay subscription service on their web site earlier this year, I
was very reluctant to pay the $50 annual subscription fee even
though I read their op-ed columnists, on the web, almost every
single day of the year.


There’s a big difference between The Times’s [TimesSelect](http://select.nytimes.com/pages/timesselect/index.html) system
and my membership system at Daring Fireball, which is that I’m
keeping all of my article content freely available to the public,
whereas the *only* way to read The Times op-ed columnists is to pay
for a TimesSelect account. I’m just pointing out that $50 a year
isn’t a lot of money for something I read at least 300 times per
year — it works out to like 15 cents a day — but yet I was
reluctant to sign-up because it just didn’t seem right to have to
pay for something to read on the web.


That’s what’s so gratifying about the membership system here —
readers aren’t signing up because they have to. They’re signing up
because they *want* to.


Of course, it helps too that the shirts are pretty fun:



| **Previous:** | [Using .htaccess Redirection to Standardize Web Server Addresses](https://daringfireball.net/2006/05/htaccess_redirection) |
| **Next:** | [Jackass of the Week: Rob Glaser](https://daringfireball.net/2006/05/rob_glaser_jackass) |


PreviousNext