---
title: "Bluesky: Twitter Announces Effort to Build ‘Decentralized Standard for Social Media’"
date: 2019-12-11
url: https://daringfireball.net/2019/12/bluesky
slug: bluesky
word_count: 445
---


[Jack Dorsey drops a bombshell](https://twitter.com/jack/status/1204766078468911106):


> Twitter is funding a small independent team of up to five open
> source architects, engineers, and designers to develop an open and
> decentralized standard for social media. The goal is for Twitter
> to ultimately be a client of this standard.
> Twitter was so open early on that many saw its potential to be a
> decentralized internet standard, like SMTP (email protocol). For a
> variety of reasons, all reasonable at the time, we took a
> different path and increasingly centralized Twitter. But a lot’s
> changed over the years…
> First, we’re facing entirely new challenges centralized solutions
> are struggling to meet. For instance, centralized enforcement of
> global policy to address abuse and misleading information is
> unlikely to scale over the long-term without placing far too much
> burden on people.


The whole thing could (and perhaps is likely to) fizzle out, but if successful, decentralizing Twitter-like social media should be a huge win for the world. But why create something new? There’s a whiff of boil-the-ocean in Dorsey’s description of the plan — “blockchain” is the new second step in the South Park “(1) Steal underpants, (2) …, (3) Profit!” to my mind).


[Dave Winer](http://scripting.com/2019/12/11.html):


> I advocate something different, Twitter already has the bugs and
> scaling issues solved for a global notification network. Let’s add
> a few APIs and create a new universe. It’ll happen a lot faster
> with much better results imho. […]
> It’s time for a *proprietary* approach, one that is open to
> cloning. That can work because there’s a single decision-making
> entity. If their goal really is to create a standard they can do
> it, much the way we created standards for content syndication when
> our product dominated.


[Loren Brichter](https://twitter.com/lorenb/status/1204773107942203393):


> What’s the downside to letting the Twitter API as it stands be
> v1.0? Let third parties implement it, clients could connect to any
> compatible service, communication between services would evolve as
> needs evolve, you end up with something designed naturally (see
> HTML5 vs XHTML).


The HTML5 vs. XHTML analogy is exactly what triggers my spidey sense with Bluesky. XHTML was a boil-the-ocean plan to create a new version of HTML, its creators’ ideal for how HTML *should* be used — a *prescriptive* spec. HTML5 took the approach of standardizing how HTML already was being used — a *descriptive* spec.  We all use HTML5 today.



| **Previous:** | [The Other Shoe Drops: Away Fires CEO Steph Korey After Months-Long Search for Her Replacement](https://daringfireball.net/2019/12/away_replaces_ceo) |
| **Next:** | [Catalyst, Two Months In](https://daringfireball.net/2019/12/catalyst_two_months_in) |


PreviousNext