---
title: "ReIntroducing Into"
date: 2015-02-03
url: https://mrocklin.github.io/blog/work/2015/02/03/Into
slug: Into
word_count: 630
---

*This work is supported by [Continuum Analytics](http://continuum.io)
and the [XDATA Program](http://www.darpa.mil/program/XDATA)
as part of the [Blaze Project](http://blaze.pydata.org)*

**tl;dr `into` efficiently migrates data between formats.**

## Motivation

We spend a lot of time migrating data from common interchange formats, like
 `CSV` , to efficient computation formats like an array, a database or binary
store.  Worse, many don’t migrate data to efficient formats because they don’t
know how or can’t manage the particular migration process for their tools.

Your choice of data format is important.  It strongly impacts performance (10x
is a good rule of thumb) and who can easily use and interpret your data.

When advocating for  [Blaze](http://continuum.io/open-source/blaze)  I often say
“Blaze can help you query your data in a variety of formats.”  This assumes
that you’re able to actually get it in to that format.

## Enter the  `into`  project

The  `into`  function efficiently migrates data between formats.
These formats include both in-memory data structures like the following:

```
list, set, tuple, Iterator
numpy.ndarray, pandas.DataFrame, dynd.array
Streaming Sequences of any of the above
```

as well as persistent data living outside of Python like the following:

```
CSV, JSON, line-delimited-JSON
Remote versions of the above
HDF5 (both standard and Pandas formatting), BColz, SAS
SQL databases (anything supported by SQLAlchemy), Mongo
```

The  `into`  project migrates data between any pair of these formats efficiently
by using a network of pairwise conversions.  (visualized towards the bottom of
this post)

## How to use it

The  `into`  function takes two arguments, a source and a target.  It moves data
in the source to the target.  The source and target can take the following
forms

So the following would be valid calls to  `into`

Note that  `into`  is a single function.  We’re used to doing this with various
 `to_csv` ,  `from_sql`  methods on various types.  The  `into`  api is very small;
Here is what you need in order to get started:

```
$ pip install into
```

[See into on `github`](https://github.com/ContinuumIO/into/)

## Examples

We now show some of those same examples in more depth.

Turn list into numpy array

Load CSV file into Python list

Translate CSV file into JSON

```
$ head accounts.json
{"balance": 100, "id": 1, "name": "Alice"}
{"balance": 200, "id": 2, "name": "Bob"}
{"balance": 300, "id": 3, "name": "Charlie"}
{"balance": 400, "id": 4, "name": "Denis"}
{"balance": 500, "id": 5, "name": "Edith"}
```

Translate line-delimited JSON into a Pandas DataFrame

## How does it work?

This is challenging.  Robust and efficient conversions between any two pairs of
formats is fraught with special cases and bizarre libraries.  The common
solution is to convert through a common format like a DataFrame, or streaming
in-memory lists, dicts, etc. (see  [`dat`](http://dat-data.com/) )
or through a serialization format like
 [ProtoBuf](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/)  or
 [Thrift](https://thrift.apache.org/) .  These are excellent options and often
what you want.  Sometimes however this can be slow, particularly when dealing
with live computational systems or with finicky storage solutions.

Consider for example, migrating between a  `numpy.recarray`  and a
 `pandas.DataFrame` .  We can migrate this data very quickly in place.  The bytes
of data don’t need to change, only the metadata surrounding them.  We don’t
need to serialize to an interchange format or translate to intermediate
pure Python objects.

Consider migrating data from a CSV file to a PostgreSQL database.  Using
Python iterators through SQLAlchemy we rarely exceed migration speeds greater
than 2000 records per second.  However using direct CSV loaders native to
PostgreSQL we can achieve speeds greater than 50000 records per second.  This
is the difference between an overnight job and a cup of coffee.  However this
requires that we’re flexible enough to use special code in special situations.

*Expert pairwise interactions are often an order of magnitude faster than
generic solutions.*

Into is a network of these pairwise migrations.  We visualize that network
below:
