---
title: "entr: rerun your build when files change"
date: 2020-06-28
url: https://jvns.ca/blog/2020/06/28/entr/
slug: entr
word_count: 600
---


This is going to be a pretty quick post  – I found out about [`entr`](http://eradman.com/entrproject/) relatively
recently and I felt like WHY DID NOBODY TELL ME ABOUT THIS BEFORE?!?! So I’m
telling you about it in case you’re in the same boat as I was.


There’s a great explanation of the tool with lots of examples on [entr’s website](http://eradman.com/entrproject/).


The summary is in the headline: `entr` is a command line tool that lets you run
an arbitrary command every time you change any of a set of specified files. You
pass it the list of files to watch on stdin, like this:


```
git ls-files | entr bash my-build-script.sh

```


or


```
find . -name *.rs | entr cargo test

```


or whatever you want really.


### quick feedback is amazing


Like possibly every single programmer in the universe, I find it Very Annoying
to have to manually rerun my build / tests every time I make a change to my
code.


A lot of tools (like hugo and flask) have a built in system to automatically
rebuild when you change your files, which is great!


But often I have some hacked together custom build process that I wrote myself
(like `bash build.sh`), and `entr` lets me have a magical build experience
where I get instant feedback on whether my change fixed the weird bug with just
one line of bash. Hooray!


### restart a server (`entr -r`)


Okay, but what if you’re running a server, and the server needs to be restarted
every time you change a file? entr’s got you – if you pass `-r`, then


```
git ls-files | entr -r python my-server.py

```


### clear the screen (`entr -c`)


Another neat flag is `-c`, which lets you clear the screen before rerunning the
command, so that you don’t get distracted/confused by the previous build’s
output.


### use it with `git ls-files`


Usually the set of files I want to track is about the same list of files I have
in git, so `git ls-files` is a natural thing to pipe to `entr`.


I have a project right now where sometimes I have files that I’ve just created
that aren’t in git just yet. So what if you want to include untracked files?
These git command line arguments will do it (I got them from an email from a reader, thank you!):


```
git ls-files -cdmo --exclude-standard  | entr your-build-script

```


Someone emailed me and said they have a `git-entr` command that runs


```
git ls-files -cdmo --exclude-standard | entr -d "$@"

```


which I think is a great idea.


### restart every time a new file is added: `entr -d`


The other problem with this `git ls-files` thing is that sometimes I add a new
file, and of course it’s not in git yet. entr has a nice feature for this – if
you pass `-d`, then if you add a new file in any of the directories entr is
tracking, then it’ll exit.


I’m using this paired with a little while loop that will restart
`entr` to include the new files, like this:


```
while true
do
{ git ls-files; git ls-files . --exclude-standard --others; } | entr -d your-build-script
done

```


### how entr works on Linux: inotify


On Linux, entr works using `inotify` (a system for tracking filesystem events
like file changes) –  if you strace it, you’ll see an `inotify_add_watch`
system call for each file you ask it to watch, like this:


```
inotify_add_watch(3, "static/stylesheets/screen.css", IN_ATTRIB|IN_CLOSE_WRITE|IN_CREATE|IN_DELETE_SELF|IN_MOVE_SELF) = 1152

```


### that’s all!


I hope this helps a few people learn about `entr`!
