---
title: "Some things about getaddrinfo that surprised me"
date: 2022-02-23
url: https://jvns.ca/blog/2022/02/23/getaddrinfo-is-kind-of-weird/
slug: getaddrinfo-is-kind-of-weird
word_count: 1128
---


Hello! Here are some things you may or may not have noticed about DNS:

- when you resolve a DNS name in a Python program, it checks `/etc/hosts`, but when you use `dig`, it doesn’t.
- switching Linux distributions can sometimes change how your DNS works, for example if you use Alpine Linux instead of Ubuntu it can cause problems.
- Mac OS has DNS caching, but Linux doesn’t necessarily unless you use `systemd-resolved` or something


To understand all of these, we need to learn about a function called
`getaddrinfo` which is responsible for doing DNS lookups.


There are a bunch of surprising-to-me things about `getaddrinfo`, and once I
learned about them, it explained a bunch of the confusing DNS behaviour I’d
seen in the past.


### where does `getaddrinfo` come from?


`getaddrinfo` is part of a library called `libc` which is the standard C
library. There are at least 3 versions of libc:

1. glibc (GNU libc)
2. musl libc
3. the Mac OS version of libc (I don’t know if this has a name)


There are definitely more (I assume FreeBSD and OpenBSD each have their own
version for example), but those are the 3 I know about.


Each of those have their own version of `getaddrinfo`.


### not all programs use `getaddrinfo` for DNS


The first thing I found surprising is that `getaddrinfo` is very widely used
but not universally used.


Every program has basically 2 options:

1. use `getaddrinfo`. I think that Python, Ruby, and Node use `getaddrinfo`, as well as Go sometimes. Probably many more languages too but I did not have the time to go hunting through every language’s DNS library.
2. use a custom DNS resolver function. Examples of this:
  - dig. I think this is because dig needs more control over the DNS query
than `getaddrinfo` supports so it implements its own DNS logic.
  - Go also has a pure-Go DNS resolver if you don’t want to use CGo
  - There’s a Ruby gem with a [custom DNS resolver](https://ruby-doc.org/stdlib-2.5.1/libdoc/resolv/rdoc/Resolv.html) that you can use to replace `getaddrinfo`.
  - `getaddrinfo` doesn’t support DNS over HTTPS, so I assume that browsers
that use DoH are not using `getaddrinfo` for those DNS lookups
  - probably lots more that I’m not aware of


### you’ll sometimes see `getaddrinfo` in your DNS error messages


Because `getaddrinfo` is so widely used, you’ll often see it in error messages related to DNS.


For example if I run this Python program which looks up nonexistent domain name:


```
import requests

requests.get("http://xyxqqx.com")

```


I get this error message:


```
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/usr/lib/python3.10/site-packages/urllib3/connection.py", line 174, in _new_conn
    conn = connection.create_connection(
  File "/usr/lib/python3.10/site-packages/urllib3/util/connection.py", line 72, in create_connection
    for res in socket.getaddrinfo(host, port, family, socket.SOCK_STREAM):
  File "/usr/lib/python3.10/socket.py", line 955, in getaddrinfo
    for res in _socket.getaddrinfo(host, port, family, type, proto, flags):
socket.gaierror: [Errno -2] Name or service not known

```


I think `socket.getaddrinfo` is calling libc `getaddrinfo` somewhere under the
hood, though I did not read all of the source code to check.


Before you learn what `getaddrinfo` is, it’s not at all obvious that
`socket.gaierror: [Errno -2] Name or service not known` means “that domain
doesn’t exist”. It doesn’t even say the words “DNS” or “domain” in it
anywhere!


### `getaddrinfo` on Mac doesn’t use `/etc/resolv.conf`


I used to use a Mac for work, and I always felt vaguely unsettled by DNS on
Mac. I could tell that **something** was different from how it worked on my
Linux machine, but I couldn’t figure out what it was.


I still don’t totally understand this and it’s hard for me to investigate
because I don’t currently have access to a Mac but here’s what I’ve gathered
so far.


On Linux systems, `getaddrinfo` decides which DNS resolver to talk to using a
file called `/etc/resolv.conf`. (there’s apparently some additional
complexity with `/etc/nsswitch.conf` but I have never looked at
`/etc/nsswitch.conf` so I’m going to ignore it).


For example, this is the contents of my `/etc/resolv.conf` right now:


```
# Generated by NetworkManager
nameserver 192.168.1.1
nameserver fd13:d987:748a::1

```


This means that to make DNS queries, `getaddrinfo` makes a request to
`192.168.1.1` on port 53. That’s my router’s DNS resolver.


I assumed this was `getaddrinfo` on Mac also just used `/etc/resolv.conf` but I was wrong.
Instead, `getaddrinfo` makes a request to a program called `mDNSResponder`
which is a Mac thing.


I don’t know much about `mDNSResponder` except that it does DNS caching and
that apparently you can clear the cache with `dscacheutil`. This explains one
of the mysteries at the beginning of the post – why Macs have DNS caching and
Linux machines don’t always.


### musl libc `getaddrinfo` is different from glibc’s version


You might think ok, Mac OS `getaddrinfo` is different, but the two versions of
`getaddrinfo` in glibc and musl libc must be mostly the same, right?


But they have some pretty significant differences. The main difference I know
about is that musl libc does not support TCP DNS. I couldn’t find anything in
the documentation about it but it’s mentioned in [this tweet](https://twitter.com/RichFelker/status/994667677112156161))


I talked a bit more about this TCP DNS thing in [ways DNS can break](https://jvns.ca/blog/2022/01/15/some-ways-dns-can-break/).


Some more differences:

- the way search domains (in `/etc/resolv.conf`) are handled is slightly different ([discussed here](https://wiki.musl-libc.org/functional-differences-from-glibc.html#Name-Resolver/DNS))
- this post mentions that [musl doesn’t support nsswitch.conf](https://utcc.utoronto.ca/~cks/space/blog/linux/GlibcAndLinuxAPI).
I have never used nsswitch.conf and I’m not sure why it’s useful but I think
there are reasons I don’t know about.


### more weird things: nscd?


When looking up getaddrinfo I also found this interesting [post about getaddrinfo from James Fisher](https://jameshfisher.com/2018/02/03/what-does-getaddrinfo-do/) that
straces glibc `getaddrinfo` and discovers that apparently calls some
program called `nscd` which is supposed to do DNS caching. That blog post
describes nscd as “unstable” and “badly designed” and it’s not clear to me how
widely used it is.


I don’t know anything about nscd but I checked and apparently it’s on my
computer. I tried it out and this is what happened:


```
$ nscd 
child exited with status 4

```


My impression is that people who want to do DNS caching on Linux are more
likely to use a DNS forwarder like `dnsmasq` or `systemd-resolved` instead of
something like `nscd` – that’s what I’ve seen in the past.


### that’s all!


When I first learned about all of this I found it really surprising that such
a widely used library function has such different behaviour on different
platforms.


I mean, it makes sense that the people who built Mac OS would want to handle
DNS caching in a different way than it’s handled on Linux, so it’s reasonable
that they implemented `getaddrinfo` differently.  And it makes sense that some
programs choose not to use `getaddrinfo` to make DNS queries.


But it definitely makes DNS a bit more difficult to reason about.
