---
title: "Tech Time Got Eaten"
date: 2008-06-08
url: https://www.kalzumeus.com/2008/06/08/day-2/
slug: day-2
word_count: 285
---


Sadly, I did not get my prototype done today.  There were a few reasons — the most glaring is that my limited stock of willingness to debug code on a Sunday was eaten by getting an archaic VBulletin moved from its previous location to one of my VPSes, as a favor to my college buddies.  Nice update interface, very user friendly — a pity about it taking 400 clickthroughs to complete installation (*I kept track*).


Still, its done and now the server is hardened so that we don’t get owned by every exploit on the Internet.  I wanted to cry when I saw its previous state — using an outdated PHP and MySql running as root, naturally, with a four letter password the same as the name of the previous site owner.  Sigh.  Suffice it to say I got a lot of use out of rand() today.


On a note at least semi-related to uISVs: I continue to be amazed by how awesome it is to have a VPS over shared hosting, **provided that** you have some skill in Linux administration.  If you do, totally amazing — I got to hack together that forum without disrupting either of the blogs running on the same machine and I can host them all with admirable performance for $20 a month.  Then I use a second VPS with the same company ([Slicehost](http://www.slicehost.com)) to run Bingo Card Creator.  I’m probably going to get a third one to host this project and, if my expectations are correct, it may need to be a little bigger than the 256 MB $20 a month variety…  Hopefully *much* bigger…  First Prayer of Computer Programmers with Business Sense: Please Lord, **send me scaleability issues**.
