---
title: "The Siren Songs of Hack Day Projects"
date: 2012-07-22
url: https://www.elidedbranches.com/2012/07/the-siren-songs-of-hack-day-projects.html
word_count: 722
---

I love hack days. I think spending a day every now and then to just work on whatever inspires you is one of the best trends of the last five years. Whether you use it to try out a new idea, fix a problem that's been bothering you for months, or play with a new tool, it's a great use of engineering time.
However, we can't forget the seductive illusion of the hack. When you have one day to make something, and you decide to make something new, you make it however you can. You don't write tests (unless perhaps you are the most enlightened TDDer). You don't worry about edge cases. You don't plan for scale. You're playing! You're having fun! You're creating something beautiful and impressive that can bring new frontiers to your business!
What's the downside? A good hack day produces ideas and projects that you want to put into production. But when the time comes to actually take those projects and make them production-worthy it's often quite a letdown. At Rent the Runway we've seen this happen twice over our two hack days. On the first, the whole team worked on a project to rebuild "Rent the Runway" on a completely new platform. The story goes that they got 80% of the way through in one 24 hour binge. 80%! This incredible feat actually lead us to say that we would move the entire site off of our existing platform within the next 3-4 months. Heck, if we could get 80% of the site rewritten by the whole team working for a day, surely we could get the site rewritten completely in a few months.
I'm a bit embarrassed to admit that we all bought into the hype of the 80% completion for longer than we should've. In reality, the 80% completion was more like "80% of basic functionality completed", which is still very impressive but ignores the 50% of required functionality that goes well beyond basic. A 3-4 month rewrite timeline might be realistic if you could take the entire engineering team, build no new features, and eventually ship something similar but not quite the same. Of course, none of these things are ever true.
The most recent hack day had some of our engineers build a very cool project utilizing our reviews data. So cool, in fact, that our product team latched on to it and decided to make it into a full-fledged major launch. Success! And now... we're just finishing a couple of intense weeks of project planning for what is quickly turning into a man-year's worth of an engineering project. It will be cool when it launches, but I don't think any of us expected this cool thing that took a day to hack to turn into 4 engineers working for three full months just to get a polished v1.
The hack day siren song can also cause you to fall in love with your hack so much you don't see the cost to making it production-ready. I've known of engineers that went off on their own and neglected their other duties for projects that would never see the light of production due to their complexity and questionable business value. It's hard to complain when people are working on something they're passionate about, but it's important for a team to feel like they are all working toward the same goal, and that can be difficult when some members are spending most of their time tinkering with side projects.
I'm jaded and boring, so my most recent hack day project took some images that were stored in the database and put them on the CDN. It took me longer than anticipated, but I wrote tests and made it work in both production and staging and released it that day. (My expected 2 hour hack still took me closer to 6 hours end to end.) It also enabled other hack day projects, which was really the point. At the end of the day, I'm glad most of the engineers I work with use their hack days to shoot for the moon, even if the final results always take longer to achieve than we hope and maybe spill over past that one day. After all, what's the point in fast-loading images if no one ever views them?