---
title: "Developer Joy, Part 2"
date: 2012-02-01
url: https://www.elidedbranches.com/2012/02/developer-joy-part-2.html
word_count: 615
---

I got some good comments on my
[last post](http://whilefalse.blogspot.com/2012/01/developer-joy.html)
, including a few submissions. One idea that I intentionally left out was that of working on a project you're passionate about. In fact, I think the point of developer joy is that developer joy has to transcend love for a project. It is the stuff that keeps us going despite working on code with a purpose which we find boring. It is the stuff that makes writing dull-but-important software worthwhile. It's the stuff that, in short, every good tech lead should keep an eye on.
Sadly, most developers are not working on problems that they find intrinsically fascinating. I told myself in coming into computing as a career that one reason I was doing it was that it had application in so many areas. And getting to apply computing to the fashion industry is a problem I find rather fascinating (and never in a million years expected to be solving). But I spent many years in industries that bored me to death to get to where I am today, and I still enjoyed myself immensely doing it so long as I had enough elements of developer joy.
As an illustration of this joy, one of the more enjoyable projects I ever worked on was the distribution of the test runner for a code base I worked on. The code base had thousands of tests, most of which were slow integration tests, and we expected this test suite to run and pass both on every checkin, and before developers checked in code. We'd gotten to a point where tests were taking 4 hours and most of a developer's local CPU cycles. We weren't willing to just get rid of tests, we weren't able to refactor the external dependencies completely to make the individual tests themselves faster (ah, sybase stored procedures!), so we set about to figuring out how to run this build process across a farm of machines. I like distributed computing, but this problem was more about dealing with the distribution system we used, debugging strange transient errors when we pulled formerly-sequential tests apart, and setting up a bunch of infrastructure to get things working.
Why did this project end up being so fulfilling? Well, for one, the team working on the project was incredibly smart. The main developer taught me a ton about the underlying distributed system and in turn we had some great team sessions of brainstorming. The whole project was around testing, and of course we wrote tests themselves for the project components so it was a well-developed system. We had plenty of time to actually work on the problem. And the solution we produced was pretty awesome. In short, it was a fun problem to solve not because I love build systems and tools (a common mis-conception about me, actually), but because I love solving hard problems, solving them well, and solving them with smart people.
Some developers are always going to need projects that they are passionate about. Those developers tend to form startups, go into academia, or find a spot in a big company with the resources to splash on their particular niche. But most of us work on problems that we solve to pay the bills. That doesn't mean there isn't joy in a day's work. When that work involves learning new things, perfecting your own expertise, being able to solve problems and see those solutions delivered, it gives us joy. Tech leads, CTOs, and founders sometimes forget that the people working for them may not have the same love for the project that they do. Keeping up the elements of developer joy helps bridge that inspiration gap.