---
title: "Docker Containers on the Desktop"
date: 2015-02-21
url: https://blog.jessfraz.com/post/docker-containers-on-the-desktop/
slug: docker-containers-on-the-desktop
word_count: 2296
---

# Docker Containers on the Desktop Docker Containers on the Desktop Saturday, February 21, 2015 · 5 min read #### Table of Contents Table of Contents * TUIs (Text User Interface, pronouncedtoo-eee)1. Irssi2. Mutt3. Rainbowstream4. LynxGUIs5. Chrome6. Spotify7. Gparted8. Skype9. Tor Browser10. Cathode * TUIs (Text User Interface, pronouncedtoo-eee)1. Irssi2. Mutt3. Rainbowstream4. Lynx [TUIs (Text User Interface, pronouncedtoo-eee)](#tuis-text-user-interface-pronounced-too-eee) TUIs (Text User Interface, pronounced *too-eee* too-eee ) * 1. Irssi [1. Irssi](#1-irssi) 1. Irssi * 2. Mutt [2. Mutt](#2-mutt) 2. Mutt * 3. Rainbowstream [3. Rainbowstream](#3-rainbowstream) 3. Rainbowstream * 4. Lynx [4. Lynx](#4-lynx) 4. Lynx * GUIs5. Chrome6. Spotify7. Gparted8. Skype9. Tor Browser10. Cathode [GUIs](#guis) GUIs * 5. Chrome [5. Chrome](#5-chrome) 5. Chrome * 6. Spotify [6. Spotify](#6-spotify) 6. Spotify * 7. Gparted [7. Gparted](#7-gparted) 7. Gparted * 8. Skype [8. Skype](#8-skype) 8. Skype * 9. Tor Browser [9. Tor Browser](#9-tor-browser) 9. Tor Browser * 10. Cathode [10. Cathode](#10-cathode) 10. Cathode Hello! Hello! If you are not familiar withDocker, it is the popular open source container engine. If you are not familiar with [Docker](https://github.com/docker/docker) Docker , it is the popular open source container engine. Most people use Docker for containing applications to deploy into production or for building their applications in a contained environment. This is all fine & dandy, and saves developers & ops engineers huge headaches, but I like to use Docker in a not-so-typical way. Most people use Docker for containing applications to deploy into production or for building their applications in a contained environment. This is all fine & dandy, and saves developers & ops engineers huge headaches, but I like to use Docker in a not-so-typical way. I use Docker to run all the desktop apps on my computers. I use Docker to run all the desktop apps on my computers. But why would I even want to run all these apps in containers? Well let me explain. I used to be an OS X user, and the great thing about OS X is the OS X App Sandbox. But why would I even want to run all these apps in containers? Well let me explain. I used to be an OS X user, and the great thing about OS X is the OS X App Sandbox. > App Sandbox is an access control technology provided in OS X, enforced at the kernel level. Its strategy is twofold:App Sandbox enables you to describe how your app interacts with the system. The system then grants your app the access it needs to get its job done, and no more.App Sandbox provides a last line of defense against the theft, corruption, or deletion of user data if an attacker successfully exploits security holes in your app or the frameworks it is linked against.Apple About App Sandbox App Sandbox is an access control technology provided in OS X, enforced at the kernel level. Its strategy is twofold: App Sandbox is an access control technology provided in OS X, enforced at the kernel level. Its strategy is twofold: App Sandbox enables you to describe how your app interacts with the system. The system then grants your app the access it needs to get its job done, and no more. App Sandbox enables you to describe how your app interacts with the system. The system then grants your app the access it needs to get its job done, and no more. App Sandbox provides a last line of defense against the theft, corruption, or deletion of user data if an attacker successfully exploits security holes in your app or the frameworks it is linked against. App Sandbox provides a last line of defense against the theft, corruption, or deletion of user data if an attacker successfully exploits security holes in your app or the frameworks it is linked against. Apple About App Sandbox [Apple About App Sandbox](https://developer.apple.com/library/mac/documentation/Security/Conceptual/AppSandboxDesignGuide/AboutAppSandbox/AboutAppSandbox.html) Apple About App Sandbox I am using the Apple App Sandbox as an example so people can grasp the concept easily. I amnotsaying this is exactly like that and has all the features. This is not a sandbox. It is more like a cool hack. I am using the Apple App Sandbox as an example so people can grasp the concept easily. I am **not** not saying this is exactly like that and has all the features. This is not a sandbox. It is more like a cool hack. I hate installing things on my host and the files getting everywhere. I wanted the ability to delete an app and know it is gone fully without some random file hanging around. This gave me that. Not only that, I can control how much CPU and Memory the app uses. Yes, the cpu/memory hungry chrome is now perfectly contained! I hate installing things on my host and the files getting everywhere. I wanted the ability to delete an app and know it is gone fully without some random file hanging around. This gave me that. Not only that, I can control how much CPU and Memory the app uses. Yes, the cpu/memory hungry chrome is now perfectly contained! “What?!?!”, you say. Let me show you. **“What?!?!”** “What?!?!” , you say. Let me show you. The following covers a few of my favorite applications I run in containers. Each of the commands written below is actually pulled directly from my bash aliases. So you can have the same user experience as running one command today. The following covers a few of my favorite applications I run in containers. Each of the commands written below is actually pulled directly from my bash aliases. So you can have the same user experience as running one command today. ## TUIs (Text User Interface, pronouncedtoo-eee) TUIs (Text User Interface, pronounced *too-eee* too-eee ) Let’s start with some easy text-based applications: Let’s start with some easy text-based applications: ### 1. Irssi 1. Irssi Dockerfile [Dockerfile](https://github.com/jessfraz/dockerfiles/blob/master/irssi/Dockerfile) Dockerfile Best IRC client. Best IRC client. ``` $ docker run -it \ -v /etc/localtime:/etc/localtime \ -v $HOME/.irssi:/home/user/.irssi \ # mounts irssi config in container --read-only \ # cool new feature in 1.5 --name irssi \ jess/irssi ``` $ docker run -it \ -v /etc/localtime:/etc/localtime \ -v $HOME/.irssi:/home/user/.irssi \ # mounts irssi config in container --read-only \ # cool new feature in 1.5 --name irssi \ jess/irssi ### 2. Mutt 2. Mutt Dockerfile [Dockerfile](https://github.com/jessfraz/dockerfiles/blob/master/mutt/Dockerfile) Dockerfile The text based email client that rules! The text based email client that rules! ``` $ docker run -it \ -v /etc/localtime:/etc/localtime \ -e GMAIL -e GMAIL_NAME \ # pass env variables to config -e GMAIL_PASS -e GMAIL_FROM \ -v $HOME/.gnupg:/home/user/.gnupg \ # so you can encrypt ;) --name mutt \ jess/mutt ``` $ docker run -it \ -v /etc/localtime:/etc/localtime \ -e GMAIL -e GMAIL_NAME \ # pass env variables to config -e GMAIL_PASS -e GMAIL_FROM \ -v $HOME/.gnupg:/home/user/.gnupg \ # so you can encrypt ;) --name mutt \ jess/mutt ### 3. Rainbowstream 3. Rainbowstream Dockerfile [Dockerfile](https://github.com/jessfraz/dockerfiles/blob/master/rainbowstream/Dockerfile) Dockerfile Awesome text based twitter client. Awesome text based twitter client. ``` $ docker run -it \ -v /etc/localtime:/etc/localtime \ -v $HOME/.rainbow_oauth:/root/.rainbow_oauth \ # mount config files -v $HOME/.rainbow_config.json:/root/.rainbow_config.json \ --name rainbowstream \ jess/rainbowstream ``` $ docker run -it \ -v /etc/localtime:/etc/localtime \ -v $HOME/.rainbow_oauth:/root/.rainbow_oauth \ # mount config files -v $HOME/.rainbow_config.json:/root/.rainbow_config.json \ --name rainbowstream \ jess/rainbowstream ### 4. Lynx 4. Lynx Dockerfile [Dockerfile](https://github.com/jessfraz/dockerfiles/blob/master/lynx/Dockerfile) Dockerfile The browser everyone loves (to hate).but secretly I love The browser everyone loves (to hate). *but secretly I love* but secretly I love ``` $ docker run -it \ --name lynx \ jess/lynx ``` $ docker run -it \ --name lynx \ jess/lynx Yes I know my blog looks GREAT in lynx *Yes I know my blog looks GREAT in lynx* Yes I know my blog looks GREAT in lynx Okay, those text based apps are fun and all but how about we spice things up a bit. Okay, those text based apps are fun and all but how about we spice things up a bit. ## GUIs GUIs None of the images below useX11-Forwardingwith ssh. Because why should you ever have to installsshinto a container? EWWW UNNECESSARY BLOAT! None of the images below use `X11-Forwarding` X11-Forwarding with ssh. Because why should you ever have to install `ssh` ssh into a container? EWWW UNNECESSARY BLOAT! The images work by mounting theX11socket into the container! Yippeeeee! The images work by mounting the `X11` X11 socket into the container! Yippeeeee! The commands listed below are run on a linux machine. But Mac users, I have a special surprise for you. You can also do fun hacks with X11. Details are describedhere. The commands listed below are run on a linux machine. But Mac users, I have a special surprise for you. You can also do fun hacks with X11. Details are described [here](https://github.com/docker/docker/issues/8710) here . Note my patch was added for--device /dev/sndin Docker 1.8, before that you needed-v /dev/snd:/dev/snd --privileged. Note my patch was added for `--device /dev/snd` --device /dev/snd in Docker 1.8, before that you needed `-v /dev/snd:/dev/snd --privileged` -v /dev/snd:/dev/snd --privileged . ### 5. Chrome 5. Chrome Dockerfile [Dockerfile](https://github.com/jessfraz/dockerfiles/blob/master/chrome/stable/Dockerfile) Dockerfile Pretty sure everyone knows what chrome is, but my image comes with flash and the google talk plugin so you can do hangouts. Pretty sure everyone knows what chrome is, but my image comes with flash and the google talk plugin so you can do hangouts. ``` $ docker run -it \ --net host \ # may as well YOLO --cpuset-cpus 0 \ # control the cpu --memory 512mb \ # max memory it can use -v /tmp/.X11-unix:/tmp/.X11-unix \ # mount the X11 socket -e DISPLAY=unix$DISPLAY \ # pass the display -v $HOME/Downloads:/root/Downloads \ # optional, but nice -v $HOME/.config/google-chrome/:/data \ # if you want to save state --device /dev/snd \ # so we have sound --name chrome \ jess/chrome ``` $ docker run -it \ --net host \ # may as well YOLO --cpuset-cpus 0 \ # control the cpu --memory 512mb \ # max memory it can use -v /tmp/.X11-unix:/tmp/.X11-unix \ # mount the X11 socket -e DISPLAY=unix$DISPLAY \ # pass the display -v $HOME/Downloads:/root/Downloads \ # optional, but nice -v $HOME/.config/google-chrome/:/data \ # if you want to save state --device /dev/snd \ # so we have sound --name chrome \ jess/chrome ### 6. Spotify 6. Spotify Dockerfile [Dockerfile](https://github.com/jessfraz/dockerfiles/blob/master/spotify/Dockerfile) Dockerfile All the 90s hits you ever wanted and more. All the 90s hits you ever wanted and more. ``` $ docker run -it \ -v /tmp/.X11-unix:/tmp/.X11-unix \ # mount the X11 socket -e DISPLAY=unix$DISPLAY \ # pass the display --device /dev/snd \ # sound --name spotify \ jess/spotify ``` $ docker run -it \ -v /tmp/.X11-unix:/tmp/.X11-unix \ # mount the X11 socket -e DISPLAY=unix$DISPLAY \ # pass the display --device /dev/snd \ # sound --name spotify \ jess/spotify ### 7. Gparted 7. Gparted Dockerfile [Dockerfile](https://github.com/docker/docker/blob/master/contrib/desktop-integration/gparted/Dockerfile) Dockerfile Partition your device in a container. Partition your device in a container. MIND BLOWN. MIND BLOWN. ``` $ docker run -it \ -v /tmp/.X11-unix:/tmp/.X11-unix \ # mount the X11 socket -e DISPLAY=unix$DISPLAY \ # pass the display --device /dev/sda:/dev/sda \ # mount the device to partition --name gparted \ jess/gparted ``` $ docker run -it \ -v /tmp/.X11-unix:/tmp/.X11-unix \ # mount the X11 socket -e DISPLAY=unix$DISPLAY \ # pass the display --device /dev/sda:/dev/sda \ # mount the device to partition --name gparted \ jess/gparted ### 8. Skype 8. Skype Dockerfile [Dockerfile](https://github.com/jessfraz/dockerfiles/blob/master/skype/Dockerfile) Dockerfile The other video conferencer. This relies on running pulseaudio also in a container. The other video conferencer. This relies on running pulseaudio also in a container. ``` # start pulseaudio $ docker run -d \ -v /etc/localtime:/etc/localtime \ -p 4713:4713 \ # expose the port --device /dev/snd \ # sound --name pulseaudio \ jess/pulseaudio ``` # start pulseaudio $ docker run -d \ -v /etc/localtime:/etc/localtime \ -p 4713:4713 \ # expose the port --device /dev/snd \ # sound --name pulseaudio \ jess/pulseaudio ``` # start skype $ docker run -it \ -v /etc/localtime:/etc/localtime \ -v /tmp/.X11-unix:/tmp/.X11-unix \ # mount the X11 socket -e DISPLAY=unix$DISPLAY \ # pass the display --device /dev/snd \ # sound --link pulseaudio:pulseaudio \ # link pulseaudio -e PULSE_SERVER=pulseaudio \ --device /dev/video0 \ # video --name skype \ jess/skype ``` # start skype $ docker run -it \ -v /etc/localtime:/etc/localtime \ -v /tmp/.X11-unix:/tmp/.X11-unix \ # mount the X11 socket -e DISPLAY=unix$DISPLAY \ # pass the display --device /dev/snd \ # sound --link pulseaudio:pulseaudio \ # link pulseaudio -e PULSE_SERVER=pulseaudio \ --device /dev/video0 \ # video --name skype \ jess/skype ### 9. Tor Browser 9. Tor Browser Dockerfile [Dockerfile](https://github.com/jessfraz/dockerfiles/blob/master/tor-browser/Dockerfile) Dockerfile Because Tor, duh! Because Tor, duh! ``` $ docker run -it \ -v /tmp/.X11-unix:/tmp/.X11-unix \ # mount the X11 socket -e DISPLAY=unix$DISPLAY \ # pass the display --device /dev/snd \ # sound --name tor-browser \ jess/tor-browser ``` $ docker run -it \ -v /tmp/.X11-unix:/tmp/.X11-unix \ # mount the X11 socket -e DISPLAY=unix$DISPLAY \ # pass the display --device /dev/snd \ # sound --name tor-browser \ jess/tor-browser ### 10. Cathode 10. Cathode Dockerfile [Dockerfile](https://github.com/jessfraz/dockerfiles/blob/master/cathode/Dockerfile) Dockerfile That super old school terminal. That super old school terminal. ``` $ docker run -it \ -v /tmp/.X11-unix:/tmp/.X11-unix \ # mount the X11 socket -e DISPLAY=unix$DISPLAY \ # pass the display --name cathode \ jess/1995 ``` $ docker run -it \ -v /tmp/.X11-unix:/tmp/.X11-unix \ # mount the X11 socket -e DISPLAY=unix$DISPLAY \ # pass the display --name cathode \ jess/1995 So that’s enough examples for now. But of course I have more. All my Dockerfiles live here:github.com/jessfraz/dockerfilesand all my docker images are on the hub:hub.docker.com/u/jess. So that’s enough examples for now. But of course I have more. All my Dockerfiles live here: [github.com/jessfraz/dockerfiles](https://github.com/jessfraz/dockerfiles) github.com/jessfraz/dockerfiles and all my docker images are on the hub: [hub.docker.com/u/jess](https://hub.docker.com/u/jess/) hub.docker.com/u/jess . I gave a talk on this atDockercon 2015, check out thevideo. I gave a talk on this at [Dockercon 2015](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cYsVvV1aVss) Dockercon 2015 , check out the [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cYsVvV1aVss) video . Happy Dockerizing!!! Happy Dockerizing!!!
