---
title: "Running a Tor relay with Docker"
date: 2015-08-23
url: https://blog.jessfraz.com/post/running-a-tor-relay-with-docker/
slug: running-a-tor-relay-with-docker
word_count: 2599
---

# Running a Tor relay with Docker Running a Tor relay with Docker Sunday, August 23, 2015 · 6 min read #### Table of Contents Table of Contents * Creating the base imageRunning a bridge relayRunning a middle relayRunning an exit relay * Creating the base imageRunning a bridge relayRunning a middle relayRunning an exit relay * Creating the base image [Creating the base image](#creating-the-base-image) Creating the base image * Running a bridge relay [Running a bridge relay](#running-a-bridge-relay) Running a bridge relay * Running a middle relay [Running a middle relay](#running-a-middle-relay) Running a middle relay * Running an exit relay [Running an exit relay](#running-an-exit-relay) Running an exit relay This post is part two of what will be a three part series. If you missed it part one wasHow to Route Traffic through a Tor Docker container. I figured it was important, if you are going to be a tor user, to document how you can help the Tor community by hosting a Tor relay. And guess what? You can use Docker to do this! This post is part two of what will be a three part series. If you missed it part one was [How to Route Traffic through a Tor Docker container](https://blog.jessfraz.com/post/routing-traffic-through-tor-docker-container/) How to Route Traffic through a Tor Docker container . I figured it was important, if you are going to be a tor user, to document how you can help the Tor community by hosting a Tor relay. And guess what? You can use Docker to do this! There are three types of relays you can host, a bridge relay, a middle relay, and an exit relay. Exit relays tend to be the ones recieving take down notices because the IP is the one the public sees traffic from Tor as. A great reference for hosting an exit node can be found hereblog.torproject.org/blog/tips-running-exit-node-minimal-harassment. But I will go over how to host each from a Docker container. My example will have a reduced exit policy and limit which ports you are willing to route traffic through. There are three types of relays you can host, a bridge relay, a middle relay, and an exit relay. Exit relays tend to be the ones recieving take down notices because the IP is the one the public sees traffic from Tor as. A great reference for hosting an exit node can be found here [blog.torproject.org/blog/tips-running-exit-node-minimal-harassment](https://blog.torproject.org/blog/tips-running-exit-node-minimal-harassment) blog.torproject.org/blog/tips-running-exit-node-minimal-harassment . But I will go over how to host each from a Docker container. My example will have a reduced exit policy and limit which ports you are willing to route traffic through. If you don’t want to host an exit node, host a middle relay instead! And if you want your relay not publically listed in the network then host a bridge. If you don’t want to host an exit node, host a middle relay instead! And if you want your relay not publically listed in the network then host a bridge. ### Creating the base image Creating the base image I have created a Docker imagejess/tor-relayfrom thisDockerfile. Feel free to create your own image with the following Dockerfile: I have created a Docker image [jess/tor-relay](https://hub.docker.com/r/jess/tor-relay/) jess/tor-relay from this [Dockerfile](https://github.com/jessfraz/dockerfiles/blob/master/tor-relay/Dockerfile) Dockerfile . Feel free to create your own image with the following Dockerfile: ``` FROM alpine:latest # Note: Tor is only in testing repo RUN apk update && apk add \ tor \ --update-cache --repository http://dl-3.alpinelinux.org/alpine/edge/testing/ \ && rm -rf /var/cache/apk/* # default port to used for incoming Tor connections # can be changed by changing 'ORPort' in torrc EXPOSE 9001 # copy in our torrc files COPY torrc.bridge /etc/tor/torrc.bridge COPY torrc.middle /etc/tor/torrc.middle COPY torrc.exit /etc/tor/torrc.exit # make sure files are owned by tor user RUN chown -R tor /etc/tor USER tor ENTRYPOINT [ "tor" ] ``` FROM alpine:latest # Note: Tor is only in testing repo RUN apk update && apk add \ tor \ --update-cache --repository http://dl-3.alpinelinux.org/alpine/edge/testing/ \ && rm -rf /var/cache/apk/* # default port to used for incoming Tor connections # can be changed by changing 'ORPort' in torrc EXPOSE 9001 # copy in our torrc files COPY torrc.bridge /etc/tor/torrc.bridge COPY torrc.middle /etc/tor/torrc.middle COPY torrc.exit /etc/tor/torrc.exit # make sure files are owned by tor user RUN chown -R tor /etc/tor USER tor ENTRYPOINT [ "tor" ] As you can see we are copying 3 differenttorrc’s into the container. One for each a bridge, middle, and exit relay. As you can see we are copying 3 different `torrc` torrc ’s into the container. One for each a bridge, middle, and exit relay. I used alpine linux because it is super minimal. The size of the image is 11.52MB! Crazyyyyyyy! I used alpine linux because it is super minimal. The size of the image is 11.52MB! Crazyyyyyyy! ### Running a bridge relay Running a bridge relay A bridge relay is not publically listed as part of the Tor network. This is helpful in places that block all the IPs of publically listed Tor relays. A bridge relay is not publically listed as part of the Tor network. This is helpful in places that block all the IPs of publically listed Tor relays. Thetorrc.bridgefile for the bridge relay looks like the following: The `torrc.bridge` torrc.bridge file for the bridge relay looks like the following: ``` ORPort 9001 ## A handle for your relay, so people don't have to refer to it by key. Nickname hacktheplanet ContactInfo ${CONTACT_GPG_FINGERPRINT} ${CONTACT_NAME} ${CONTACT_EMAIL} BridgeRelay 1 ``` ORPort 9001 ## A handle for your relay, so people don't have to refer to it by key. Nickname hacktheplanet ContactInfo ${CONTACT_GPG_FINGERPRINT} ${CONTACT_NAME} ${CONTACT_EMAIL} BridgeRelay 1 To run the image for a bridge relay: To run the image for a bridge relay: ``` $ docker run -d \ -v /etc/localtime:/etc/localtime \ # so time is synced --restart always \ # why not? -p 9001:9001 \ # expose/publish the port --name tor-relay \ jess/tor-relay -f /etc/tor/torrc.bridge ``` $ docker run -d \ -v /etc/localtime:/etc/localtime \ # so time is synced --restart always \ # why not? -p 9001:9001 \ # expose/publish the port --name tor-relay \ jess/tor-relay -f /etc/tor/torrc.bridge And now you are helping the tor network by running a bridge relay! Yayyy \o/ And now you are helping the tor network by running a bridge relay! Yayyy \o/ ### Running a middle relay Running a middle relay A middle relay is one of the first few relays traffic flows through. Traffic will always pass through at least 3 relays. The last relay being an exit node and all relays before that a middle relay. A middle relay is one of the first few relays traffic flows through. Traffic will always pass through at least 3 relays. The last relay being an exit node and all relays before that a middle relay. Thetorrc.middlefile for the middle relay looks like the following: The `torrc.middle` torrc.middle file for the middle relay looks like the following: ``` ORPort 9001 ## A handle for your relay, so people don't have to refer to it by key. Nickname hacktheplanet ContactInfo ${CONTACT_GPG_FINGERPRINT} ${CONTACT_NAME} ${CONTACT_EMAIL} ExitPolicy reject *:* ``` ORPort 9001 ## A handle for your relay, so people don't have to refer to it by key. Nickname hacktheplanet ContactInfo ${CONTACT_GPG_FINGERPRINT} ${CONTACT_NAME} ${CONTACT_EMAIL} ExitPolicy reject *:* To run the image for a middle relay: To run the image for a middle relay: ``` $ docker run -d \ -v /etc/localtime:/etc/localtime \ # so time is synced --restart always \ # why not? -p 9001:9001 \ # expose/publish the port --name tor-relay \ jess/tor-relay -f /etc/tor/torrc.middle ``` $ docker run -d \ -v /etc/localtime:/etc/localtime \ # so time is synced --restart always \ # why not? -p 9001:9001 \ # expose/publish the port --name tor-relay \ jess/tor-relay -f /etc/tor/torrc.middle And now you are helping the tor network by running a middle relay! And now you are helping the tor network by running a middle relay! ### Running an exit relay Running an exit relay The exit relay is the last relay traffic is filtered through. The exit relay is the last relay traffic is filtered through. Thetorrc.exitfile for the exit node looks like the following: The `torrc.exit` torrc.exit file for the exit node looks like the following: ``` ORPort 9001 ## A handle for your relay, so people don't have to refer to it by key. Nickname hacktheplanet ContactInfo ${CONTACT_GPG_FINGERPRINT} ${CONTACT_NAME} ${CONTACT_EMAIL} # Reduced exit policy from # https://trac.torproject.org/projects/tor/wiki/doc/ReducedExitPolicy ExitPolicy accept *:20-23 # FTP, SSH, telnet ExitPolicy accept *:43 # WHOIS ExitPolicy accept *:53 # DNS ExitPolicy accept *:79-81 # finger, HTTP ExitPolicy accept *:88 # kerberos ExitPolicy accept *:110 # POP3 ExitPolicy accept *:143 # IMAP ExitPolicy accept *:194 # IRC ExitPolicy accept *:220 # IMAP3 ExitPolicy accept *:389 # LDAP ExitPolicy accept *:443 # HTTPS ExitPolicy accept *:464 # kpasswd ExitPolicy accept *:465 # URD for SSM (more often: an alternative SUBMISSION port, see 587) ExitPolicy accept *:531 # IRC/AIM ExitPolicy accept *:543-544 # Kerberos ExitPolicy accept *:554 # RTSP ExitPolicy accept *:563 # NNTP over SSL ExitPolicy accept *:587 # SUBMISSION (authenticated clients [MUA's like Thunderbird] send mail over STARTTLS SMTP here) ExitPolicy accept *:636 # LDAP over SSL ExitPolicy accept *:706 # SILC ExitPolicy accept *:749 # kerberos ExitPolicy accept *:873 # rsync ExitPolicy accept *:902-904 # VMware ExitPolicy accept *:981 # Remote HTTPS management for firewall ExitPolicy accept *:989-995 # FTP over SSL, Netnews Administration System, telnets, IMAP over SSL, ircs, POP3 over SSL ExitPolicy accept *:1194 # OpenVPN ExitPolicy accept *:1220 # QT Server Admin ExitPolicy accept *:1293 # PKT-KRB-IPSec ExitPolicy accept *:1500 # VLSI License Manager ExitPolicy accept *:1533 # Sametime ExitPolicy accept *:1677 # GroupWise ExitPolicy accept *:1723 # PPTP ExitPolicy accept *:1755 # RTSP ExitPolicy accept *:1863 # MSNP ExitPolicy accept *:2082 # Infowave Mobility Server ExitPolicy accept *:2083 # Secure Radius Service (radsec) ExitPolicy accept *:2086-2087 # GNUnet, ELI ExitPolicy accept *:2095-2096 # NBX ExitPolicy accept *:2102-2104 # Zephyr ExitPolicy accept *:3128 # SQUID ExitPolicy accept *:3389 # MS WBT ExitPolicy accept *:3690 # SVN ExitPolicy accept *:4321 # RWHOIS ExitPolicy accept *:4643 # Virtuozzo ExitPolicy accept *:5050 # MMCC ExitPolicy accept *:5190 # ICQ ExitPolicy accept *:5222-5223 # XMPP, XMPP over SSL ExitPolicy accept *:5228 # Android Market ExitPolicy accept *:5900 # VNC ExitPolicy accept *:6660-6669 # IRC ExitPolicy accept *:6679 # IRC SSL ExitPolicy accept *:6697 # IRC SSL ExitPolicy accept *:8000 # iRDMI ExitPolicy accept *:8008 # HTTP alternate ExitPolicy accept *:8074 # Gadu-Gadu ExitPolicy accept *:8080 # HTTP Proxies ExitPolicy accept *:8082 # HTTPS Electrum Bitcoin port ExitPolicy accept *:8087-8088 # Simplify Media SPP Protocol, Radan HTTP ExitPolicy accept *:8332-8333 # Bitcoin ExitPolicy accept *:8443 # PCsync HTTPS ExitPolicy accept *:8888 # HTTP Proxies, NewsEDGE ExitPolicy accept *:9418 # git ExitPolicy accept *:9999 # distinct ExitPolicy accept *:10000 # Network Data Management Protocol ExitPolicy accept *:11371 # OpenPGP hkp (http keyserver protocol) ExitPolicy accept *:19294 # Google Voice TCP ExitPolicy accept *:19638 # Ensim control panel ExitPolicy accept *:50002 # Electrum Bitcoin SSL ExitPolicy accept *:64738 # Mumble ExitPolicy reject *:* ``` ORPort 9001 ## A handle for your relay, so people don't have to refer to it by key. Nickname hacktheplanet ContactInfo ${CONTACT_GPG_FINGERPRINT} ${CONTACT_NAME} ${CONTACT_EMAIL} # Reduced exit policy from # https://trac.torproject.org/projects/tor/wiki/doc/ReducedExitPolicy ExitPolicy accept *:20-23 # FTP, SSH, telnet ExitPolicy accept *:43 # WHOIS ExitPolicy accept *:53 # DNS ExitPolicy accept *:79-81 # finger, HTTP ExitPolicy accept *:88 # kerberos ExitPolicy accept *:110 # POP3 ExitPolicy accept *:143 # IMAP ExitPolicy accept *:194 # IRC ExitPolicy accept *:220 # IMAP3 ExitPolicy accept *:389 # LDAP ExitPolicy accept *:443 # HTTPS ExitPolicy accept *:464 # kpasswd ExitPolicy accept *:465 # URD for SSM (more often: an alternative SUBMISSION port, see 587) ExitPolicy accept *:531 # IRC/AIM ExitPolicy accept *:543-544 # Kerberos ExitPolicy accept *:554 # RTSP ExitPolicy accept *:563 # NNTP over SSL ExitPolicy accept *:587 # SUBMISSION (authenticated clients [MUA's like Thunderbird] send mail over STARTTLS SMTP here) ExitPolicy accept *:636 # LDAP over SSL ExitPolicy accept *:706 # SILC ExitPolicy accept *:749 # kerberos ExitPolicy accept *:873 # rsync ExitPolicy accept *:902-904 # VMware ExitPolicy accept *:981 # Remote HTTPS management for firewall ExitPolicy accept *:989-995 # FTP over SSL, Netnews Administration System, telnets, IMAP over SSL, ircs, POP3 over SSL ExitPolicy accept *:1194 # OpenVPN ExitPolicy accept *:1220 # QT Server Admin ExitPolicy accept *:1293 # PKT-KRB-IPSec ExitPolicy accept *:1500 # VLSI License Manager ExitPolicy accept *:1533 # Sametime ExitPolicy accept *:1677 # GroupWise ExitPolicy accept *:1723 # PPTP ExitPolicy accept *:1755 # RTSP ExitPolicy accept *:1863 # MSNP ExitPolicy accept *:2082 # Infowave Mobility Server ExitPolicy accept *:2083 # Secure Radius Service (radsec) ExitPolicy accept *:2086-2087 # GNUnet, ELI ExitPolicy accept *:2095-2096 # NBX ExitPolicy accept *:2102-2104 # Zephyr ExitPolicy accept *:3128 # SQUID ExitPolicy accept *:3389 # MS WBT ExitPolicy accept *:3690 # SVN ExitPolicy accept *:4321 # RWHOIS ExitPolicy accept *:4643 # Virtuozzo ExitPolicy accept *:5050 # MMCC ExitPolicy accept *:5190 # ICQ ExitPolicy accept *:5222-5223 # XMPP, XMPP over SSL ExitPolicy accept *:5228 # Android Market ExitPolicy accept *:5900 # VNC ExitPolicy accept *:6660-6669 # IRC ExitPolicy accept *:6679 # IRC SSL ExitPolicy accept *:6697 # IRC SSL ExitPolicy accept *:8000 # iRDMI ExitPolicy accept *:8008 # HTTP alternate ExitPolicy accept *:8074 # Gadu-Gadu ExitPolicy accept *:8080 # HTTP Proxies ExitPolicy accept *:8082 # HTTPS Electrum Bitcoin port ExitPolicy accept *:8087-8088 # Simplify Media SPP Protocol, Radan HTTP ExitPolicy accept *:8332-8333 # Bitcoin ExitPolicy accept *:8443 # PCsync HTTPS ExitPolicy accept *:8888 # HTTP Proxies, NewsEDGE ExitPolicy accept *:9418 # git ExitPolicy accept *:9999 # distinct ExitPolicy accept *:10000 # Network Data Management Protocol ExitPolicy accept *:11371 # OpenPGP hkp (http keyserver protocol) ExitPolicy accept *:19294 # Google Voice TCP ExitPolicy accept *:19638 # Ensim control panel ExitPolicy accept *:50002 # Electrum Bitcoin SSL ExitPolicy accept *:64738 # Mumble ExitPolicy reject *:* To run the image for an exit node: To run the image for an exit node: ``` $ docker run -d \ -v /etc/localtime:/etc/localtime \ # so time is synced --restart always \ # why not? -p 9001:9001 \ # expose/publish the port --name tor-relay \ jess/tor-relay -f /etc/tor/torrc.exit ``` $ docker run -d \ -v /etc/localtime:/etc/localtime \ # so time is synced --restart always \ # why not? -p 9001:9001 \ # expose/publish the port --name tor-relay \ jess/tor-relay -f /etc/tor/torrc.exit And now you are helping the tor network by running an exit relay! And now you are helping the tor network by running an exit relay! After running for a couple hours, giving time to propogate, you can checkatlas.torproject.orgto check if your node has successfully registered in the network. After running for a couple hours, giving time to propogate, you can check [atlas.torproject.org](https://atlas.torproject.org) atlas.torproject.org to check if your node has successfully registered in the network. Stay tuned for part three of the series where I go over how to run Docker containers with a Tor networking plugin I am working with Docker’s new networking plugins. But of course if you are going to use the plugin or route all your traffic through a Tor Docker container (from my first post), you should really consider hosting a relay. The more people who run relays, the faster the Tor network will be. Stay tuned for part three of the series where I go over how to run Docker containers with a Tor networking plugin I am working with Docker’s new networking plugins. But of course if you are going to use the plugin or route all your traffic through a Tor Docker container (from my first post), you should really consider hosting a relay. The more people who run relays, the faster the Tor network will be.
