---
title: "How to Route Traffic through a Tor Docker container"
date: 2015-06-20
url: https://blog.jessfraz.com/post/routing-traffic-through-tor-docker-container/
slug: routing-traffic-through-tor-docker-container
word_count: 849
---

# How to Route Traffic through a Tor Docker container How to Route Traffic through a Tor Docker container Saturday, June 20, 2015 · 2 min read #### Table of Contents Table of Contents * Run the ImageRouting Traffic * Run the ImageRouting Traffic * Run the Image [Run the Image](#run-the-image) Run the Image * Routing Traffic [Routing Traffic](#routing-traffic) Routing Traffic This blog post is going to explain how to route traffic on your host through a Tor Docker container. This blog post is going to explain how to route traffic on your host through a Tor Docker container. It’s actually a lot simplier than you would think. But it involves dealing with some unsavory things such as iptables. It’s actually a lot simplier than you would think. But it involves dealing with some unsavory things such as iptables. ### Run the Image Run the Image I have a fork of the tor source code and a branch with a Dockerfile. I have submitted upstream… we will see if they take it. The final result is the imagejess/tor, but you can easily build locally from my repojessfraz/tor. I have a fork of the tor source code and a branch with a Dockerfile. I have submitted upstream… we will see if they take it. The final result is the image [jess/tor](https://hub.docker.com/r/jess/tor) jess/tor , but you can easily build locally from my repo [jessfraz/tor](https://github.com/jessfraz/tor/tree/add-dockerfile) jessfraz/tor . So let’s run the image: So let’s run the image: ``` $ docker run -d \ --net host \ --restart always \ --name tor \ jess/tor ``` $ docker run -d \ --net host \ --restart always \ --name tor \ jess/tor Easy right? I can already hear the haters, “blah blah blah net host”. Chill out, the point is to route all our traffic duhhhh so we may as well, otherwise would need to change / overwrite some of Docker’s iptables rules, and really who has time for that shit… Easy right? I can already hear the haters, “blah blah blah net host”. Chill out, the point is to route all our traffic duhhhh so we may as well, otherwise would need to change / overwrite some of Docker’s iptables rules, and really who has time for that shit… You do? Ok make a PR tothis blog post. You do? Ok make a PR to [this blog post](https://github.com/jessfraz/blog) this blog post . ### Routing Traffic Routing Traffic Contain yourselves, I am about to throw down some sick iptables rules. Contain yourselves, I am about to throw down some sick iptables rules. ``` #!/bin/bash # Most of this is credited to # https://trac.torproject.org/projects/tor/wiki/doc/TransparentProxy # With a few minor edits # to run iptables commands you need to be root if [ "$EUID" -ne 0 ]; then echo "Please run as root." exit 1 fi ### set variables # destinations you don't want routed through Tor _non_tor="192.168.1.0/24 192.168.0.0/24" # get the UID that Tor runs as _tor_uid=$(docker exec -u tor tor id -u) # Tor's TransPort _trans_port="9040" _dns_port="5353" ### set iptables *nat iptables -t nat -A OUTPUT -m owner --uid-owner $_tor_uid -j RETURN iptables -t nat -A OUTPUT -p udp --dport 53 -j REDIRECT --to-ports $_dns_port # allow clearnet access for hosts in $_non_tor for _clearnet in $_non_tor 127.0.0.0/9 127.128.0.0/10; do iptables -t nat -A OUTPUT -d $_clearnet -j RETURN done # redirect all other output to Tor's TransPort iptables -t nat -A OUTPUT -p tcp --syn -j REDIRECT --to-ports $_trans_port ### set iptables *filter iptables -A OUTPUT -m state --state ESTABLISHED,RELATED -j ACCEPT # allow clearnet access for hosts in $_non_tor for _clearnet in $_non_tor 127.0.0.0/8; do iptables -A OUTPUT -d $_clearnet -j ACCEPT done # allow only Tor output iptables -A OUTPUT -m owner --uid-owner $_tor_uid -j ACCEPT iptables -A OUTPUT -j REJECT ``` #!/bin/bash # Most of this is credited to # https://trac.torproject.org/projects/tor/wiki/doc/TransparentProxy # With a few minor edits # to run iptables commands you need to be root if [ "$EUID" -ne 0 ]; then echo "Please run as root." exit 1 fi ### set variables # destinations you don't want routed through Tor _non_tor="192.168.1.0/24 192.168.0.0/24" # get the UID that Tor runs as _tor_uid=$(docker exec -u tor tor id -u) # Tor's TransPort _trans_port="9040" _dns_port="5353" ### set iptables *nat iptables -t nat -A OUTPUT -m owner --uid-owner $_tor_uid -j RETURN iptables -t nat -A OUTPUT -p udp --dport 53 -j REDIRECT --to-ports $_dns_port # allow clearnet access for hosts in $_non_tor for _clearnet in $_non_tor 127.0.0.0/9 127.128.0.0/10; do iptables -t nat -A OUTPUT -d $_clearnet -j RETURN done # redirect all other output to Tor's TransPort iptables -t nat -A OUTPUT -p tcp --syn -j REDIRECT --to-ports $_trans_port ### set iptables *filter iptables -A OUTPUT -m state --state ESTABLISHED,RELATED -j ACCEPT # allow clearnet access for hosts in $_non_tor for _clearnet in $_non_tor 127.0.0.0/8; do iptables -A OUTPUT -d $_clearnet -j ACCEPT done # allow only Tor output iptables -A OUTPUT -m owner --uid-owner $_tor_uid -j ACCEPT iptables -A OUTPUT -j REJECT Check that we are routing viacheck.torproject.org. Check that we are routing via [check.torproject.org](https://check.torproject.org) check.torproject.org . Woooohoooo! Success. Woooohoooo! Success.
