---
title: "Runc Containers on the Desktop"
date: 2016-01-19
url: https://blog.jessfraz.com/post/runc-containers-on-the-desktop/
slug: runc-containers-on-the-desktop
word_count: 1427
---

# Runc Containers on the Desktop Runc Containers on the Desktop Tuesday, January 19, 2016 · 4 min read #### Table of Contents Table of Contents * RiddlerNetnsMagnetoAll the configs * RiddlerNetnsMagnetoAll the configs * Riddler [Riddler](#riddler) Riddler * Netns [Netns](#netns) Netns * Magneto [Magneto](#magneto) Magneto * All the configs [All the configs](#all-the-configs) All the configs Almost exactly a year ago, I wrote a post about runningDocker Containers on the Desktop. Well it is a new year, and I have ended up converting all my docker containers toruncconfigs, so it’s the perfect time for a new blog post. Almost exactly a year ago, I wrote a post about running [Docker Containers on the Desktop](https://blog.jessfraz.com/post/docker-containers-on-the-desktop/) Docker Containers on the Desktop . Well it is a new year, and I have ended up converting all my docker containers to [runc](https://github.com/opencontainers/runc) runc configs, so it’s the perfect time for a new blog post. For those of you unfamiliar with the Open Container Initiative you should check outopencontainers.org. For those of you unfamiliar with the Open Container Initiative you should check out [opencontainers.org](https://www.opencontainers.org/) opencontainers.org . Why the switch?you ask… well let me explain. *Why the switch?* Why the switch? you ask… well let me explain. Our fellow Docker maintainer and palPhil Estesmade an awesome patch to add user namespaces to Docker. Our fellow Docker maintainer and pal [Phil Estes](https://twitter.com/estesp) Phil Estes made an awesome patch to add user namespaces to Docker. Now me, being the completely insane containerizer that I am, desperately wanted to run all my crazy sound/video device mounting containers in user namespaces. Now me, being the completely insane containerizer that I am, desperately wanted to run all my crazy sound/video device mounting containers in user namespaces. Well the way this could work is by having a customgid_mapfor theaudioandvideogroups to map to the host groups so we can have permission to access these devices in the container. In layman’s terms, I basically wanted to poke a teeny tiny map in the user namespace to be able to have permission to use my sound and video devices. Well the way this could work is by having a custom `gid_map` gid_map for the `audio` audio and `video` video groups to map to the host groups so we can have permission to access these devices in the container. In layman’s terms, I basically wanted to poke a teeny tiny map in the user namespace to be able to have permission to use my sound and video devices. Obviously this was not the design of the feature, but sinceruncexposes theuidMappingsandgidMappings, I knew I could have the power to do as I please. This is the awesome thing aboutrunc. You, the user, have all the control. Obviously this was not the design of the feature, but since `runc` runc exposes the `uidMappings` uidMappings and `gidMappings` gidMappings , I knew I could have the power to do as I please. This is the awesome thing about `runc` runc . You, the user, have all the control. So for chrome, this is what you get for mappings:github.com/jessfraz/containers:chrome/config.json#L223. If you look closely, or know what you are looking at, you can see group29and44are mapped to the same group ids as the host. So for chrome, this is what you get for mappings: [github.com/jessfraz/containers:chrome/config.json#L223](https://github.com/jessfraz/containers/blob/master/chrome/config.json#L223) github.com/jessfraz/containers:chrome/config.json#L223 . If you look closely, or know what you are looking at, you can see group `29` 29 and `44` 44 are mapped to the same group ids as the host. Then you can do cool things like listen to Taylor Swift in a container with a user namespace. Then you can do cool things like listen to Taylor Swift in a container with a user namespace. Pretty cool right. So I went all OCD on this, like most things I encounter, and I convertedallmy containers. Obviously I found a way to generate them. Pretty cool right. So I went all OCD on this, like most things I encounter, and I converted *all* all my containers. Obviously I found a way to generate them. ### Riddler Riddler Introducinggithub.com/jessfraz/riddler!riddlerwill take a running/stopped docker container and convert the inspect information into theoci spec(which can be run byrunc, or any other oci compatible tool). Introducing [github.com/jessfraz/riddler](https://github.com/jessfraz/riddler) github.com/jessfraz/riddler ! `riddler` riddler will take a running/stopped docker container and convert the inspect information into the [oci spec](https://github.com/opencontainers/specs) oci spec (which can be run by `runc` runc , or any other oci compatible tool). It has some opinionated features in that it will always try to set up agid_mapthat works with your devices. You can also pass custom hooks to automatically add to the runc config asprestart,poststart, orpoststophooks. Which leads me to the next tool I built. It has some opinionated features in that it will always try to set up a `gid_map` gid_map that works with your devices. You can also pass custom hooks to automatically add to the runc config as `prestart` prestart , `poststart` poststart , or `poststop` poststop hooks. Which leads me to the next tool I built. ### Netns Netns Say hello togithub.com/jessfraz/netns! So you want your runc containers to have networking, eh? How about something super simple like a bridge?netnsdoes just that. It sets up a bridge network for all your runc containers when added via theprestarthook. Say hello to [github.com/jessfraz/netns](https://github.com/jessfraz/netns) github.com/jessfraz/netns ! So you want your runc containers to have networking, eh? How about something super simple like a bridge? `netns` netns does just that. It sets up a bridge network for all your runc containers when added via the `prestart` prestart hook. It’s actually super simple code as well thanks to the awesomenetlinkpkgfromvishvananda. It’s actually super simple code as well thanks to the awesome [netlinkpkg](https://github.com/vishvananda/netlink) `netlink` netlink pkg from [vishvananda](https://github.com/vishvananda) vishvananda . netnseven saves the ip for the container in a.ipfile in the directory with your config. Then other hooks can use this to do other things. For instance I use thehostessclito then add an entry to my host’s/etc/hostsfile, so I don’t have to remember the ip for the container when I want to reach it. `netns` netns even saves the ip for the container in a `.ip` .ip file in the directory with your config. Then other hooks can use this to do other things. For instance I use the [hostesscli](https://github.com/cbednarski/hostess) `hostess` hostess cli to then add an entry to my host’s `/etc/hosts` /etc/hosts file, so I don’t have to remember the ip for the container when I want to reach it. You can find all my hook scripts ingithub.com/jessfraz/containers:hack/scripts. You can find all my hook scripts in [github.com/jessfraz/containers:hack/scripts](https://github.com/jessfraz/containers/tree/master/hack/scripts) github.com/jessfraz/containers:hack/scripts . ### Magneto Magneto The last tool I made was a copy ofdocker statsforrunc. But what I really wanted was the newpidscgroup stats, thatAleksa Saraiadded to the kernel and runc (and soon docker ;). The last tool I made was a copy of `docker stats` docker stats for `runc` runc . But what I really wanted was the new `pids` pids cgroup stats, that [Aleksa Sarai](https://github.com/cyphar) Aleksa Sarai added to the kernel and runc (and soon docker ;). runchas a commandrunc eventswhich outputs json stats in an interval. All you have to do is pipe that tomagnetoto get the awesome ux. `runc` runc has a command `runc events` runc events which outputs json stats in an interval. All you have to do is pipe that to [magneto](https://github.com/jessfraz/magneto) magneto to get the awesome ux. The following is for my chrome container: The following is for my chrome container: ``` $ sudo runc events | magneto ``` $ sudo runc events | magneto ### All the configs All the configs If you are interested in all the configs for my containers, checkoutgithub.com/jessfraz/containers. If you are interested in all the configs for my containers, checkout [github.com/jessfraz/containers](https://github.com/jessfraz/containers) github.com/jessfraz/containers . I even included asystemdservice filethat can easily run any container (without a tty) in this directory via: I even included a [systemdservice file](https://github.com/jessfraz/containers/blob/master/runc%40.service) `systemd` systemd service file that can easily run any container (without a tty) in this directory via: ``` $ sudo systemctl start runc@foldername # for example: $ sudo systemctl start runc@chrome ``` $ sudo systemctl start runc@foldername # for example: $ sudo systemctl start runc@chrome NOTE:Keep in mind since these are generated a lot of the filepaths are hardcoded for things onmyhost. So if you try to run these and aren’t me I don’t want to hear any whining. **NOTE:** NOTE: Keep in mind since these are generated a lot of the filepaths are hardcoded for things on *my* my host. So if you try to run these and aren’t me I don’t want to hear any whining. Happy namespacing! Happy namespacing!
