---
title: "IPs for all the Things"
date: 2016-01-28
url: https://blog.jessfraz.com/post/ips-for-all-the-things/
slug: ips-for-all-the-things
word_count: 379
---

# IPs for all the Things IPs for all the Things Thursday, January 28, 2016 · 1 min read This is so cool I can hardly stand it. This is so cool I can hardly stand it. In Docker 1.10, the awesome libnetwork team added the ability to specify a specific IP for a container. If you want to see the pull request it’s here:docker/docker#19001. In Docker 1.10, the awesome libnetwork team added the ability to specify a specific IP for a container. If you want to see the pull request it’s here: [docker/docker#19001](https://github.com/docker/docker/pull/19001) docker/docker#19001 . I have a IP Block on OVH for my server with 16 extra public IPs. I totally use these for good and not forevil. I have a IP Block on OVH for my server with 16 extra public IPs. I totally use these for good and not for [evil](https://github.com/jessfraz/tupperwarewithspears) evil . But to use these previously with Docker containers meant hackery with the awesomepipework. Or even worse some homegrown, Jess bash scripts. But to use these previously with Docker containers meant hackery with the awesome [pipework](https://github.com/jpetazzo/pipework) pipework . Or even worse some homegrown, Jess bash scripts. But now MY LIFE JUST GOT SO MUCH EASIER. Let me show you how: But now MY LIFE JUST GOT SO MUCH EASIER. Let me show you how: ``` # create a new bridge network with your subnet and gateway for your ip block $ docker network create --subnet 203.0.113.0/24 --gateway 203.0.113.254 iptastic # run a nginx container with a specific ip in that block $ docker run --rm -it --net iptastic --ip 203.0.113.2 nginx # curl the ip from any other place (assuming this is a public ip block duh) $ curl 203.0.113.2 # BOOM golden ``` # create a new bridge network with your subnet and gateway for your ip block $ docker network create --subnet 203.0.113.0/24 --gateway 203.0.113.254 iptastic # run a nginx container with a specific ip in that block $ docker run --rm -it --net iptastic --ip 203.0.113.2 nginx # curl the ip from any other place (assuming this is a public ip block duh) $ curl 203.0.113.2 # BOOM golden It’s so amazing I can rewritetupperwarewithspearsto use this :D It’s so amazing I can rewrite [tupperwarewithspears](https://github.com/jessfraz/tupperwarewithspears) tupperwarewithspears to use this :D
