---
title: "Two Objects not Namespaced by the Linux Kernel"
date: 2017-04-26
url: https://blog.jessfraz.com/post/two-objects-not-namespaced-linux-kernel/
slug: two-objects-not-namespaced-linux-kernel
word_count: 1069
---

# Two Objects not Namespaced by the Linux Kernel Two Objects not Namespaced by the Linux Kernel Wednesday, April 26, 2017 · 3 min read #### Table of Contents Table of Contents * TimeKernel Keyring * TimeKernel Keyring * Time [Time](#time) Time * Kernel Keyring [Kernel Keyring](#kernel-keyring) Kernel Keyring If you are new to my blog then you might be new to the concept of Linux kernel namespaces. I suggest first readingGetting Towards Real Sandbox ContainersandSetting the Record Straight: containers vs. Zones vs. Jails vs. VMs. If you are new to my blog then you might be new to the concept of Linux kernel namespaces. I suggest first reading [Getting Towards Real Sandbox Containers](https://blog.jessfraz.com/post/getting-towards-real-sandbox-containers/) Getting Towards Real Sandbox Containers and [Setting the Record Straight: containers vs. Zones vs. Jails vs. VMs](https://blog.jessfraz.com/post/containers-zones-jails-vms/) Setting the Record Straight: containers vs. Zones vs. Jails vs. VMs . Linux namespaces are one of the primitives that make up what is known as a “container.” They control what a process can see. Cgroups, the other main ingredient of “containers”, control what a process can use. But let’s focus for this post on namespaces. The current set of namespaces in the kernel are: mount, pid, uts, ipc, net, user, and cgroup. These all cover basically exactly what they are named after. But what is not covered? Well, let’s go over two of the things not namespaced by the Linux kernel. Linux namespaces are one of the primitives that make up what is known as a “container.” They control what a process can see. Cgroups, the other main ingredient of “containers”, control what a process can use. But let’s focus for this post on namespaces. The current set of namespaces in the kernel are: mount, pid, uts, ipc, net, user, and cgroup. These all cover basically exactly what they are named after. But what is not covered? Well, let’s go over two of the things not namespaced by the Linux kernel. ### Time Time First, and my favorite to nerd out about, istime.Now, it should go without saying thatifyou want to set the time in Linux you needCAP_SYS_TIME. By default you do not get this capability in Docker containers. Thesettimeofday, etc syscalls are also blocked by the default seccomp profile in Docker as well. First, and my favorite to nerd out about, is **time.** time. Now, it should go without saying that *if* if you want to set the time in Linux you need `CAP_SYS_TIME` CAP_SYS_TIME . By default you do not get this capability in Docker containers. The `settimeofday` settimeofday , etc syscalls are also blocked by the default seccomp profile in Docker as well. What happens if you do change the time in a container? What happens if you do change the time in a container? Well, it’s not namespaced so the time on the host would change as well. “But whaaaaa? I thought containers were just like a VM”, you ask. Again, you should read my postSetting the Record Straight: containers vs. Zones vs. Jails vs. VMs. Well, it’s not namespaced so the time on the host would change as well. “But whaaaaa? I thought containers were just like a VM”, you ask. Again, you should read my post [Setting the Record Straight: containers vs. Zones vs. Jails vs. VMs](https://blog.jessfraz.com/post/containers-zones-jails-vms/) Setting the Record Straight: containers vs. Zones vs. Jails vs. VMs . One of my favorite questions I have been asked at a conference is “If you could add any new namespace to Linux what would it be?” Obviously this is an awesome question, totally up my alley, and not even a statement from someone trying to prove to me “they know things.” But I digress, I always answer with “Time.” There is no production use case for this, other than making more NTP hell for yourself. I do believe there is a development use case: if you want to change the time for a test running in one container but not mess with the other tests running in other containers. What a fun way to make a chaos monkey for NTP! :P One of my favorite questions I have been asked at a conference is “If you could add any new namespace to Linux what would it be?” Obviously this is an awesome question, totally up my alley, and not even a statement from someone trying to prove to me “they know things.” But I digress, I always answer with “Time.” There is no production use case for this, other than making more NTP hell for yourself. I do believe there is a development use case: if you want to change the time for a test running in one container but not mess with the other tests running in other containers. What a fun way to make a chaos monkey for NTP! :P ### Kernel Keyring Kernel Keyring The kernel keyring is another item not namespaced. There have been recent efforts tofix this foruser namespaces. Again, the default Docker seccomp profile blocks these syscalls so you don’t shoot yourself in the foot. The kernel keyring is another item not namespaced. There have been recent efforts to [fix this foruser namespaces](https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/9394983/) fix this for *user namespaces* user namespaces . Again, the default Docker seccomp profile blocks these syscalls so you don’t shoot yourself in the foot. What happens if you use the kernel keyring from within in a container? What happens if you use the kernel keyring from within in a container? Well if root in one container stores keys in the keyring, any other containers on that same host can see it in their keyring, which is really just the same exact keyring. Well if root in one container stores keys in the keyring, any other containers on that same host can see it in their keyring, which is really just the same exact keyring. All in all, I hope this proves once again that you need more than just namespaces and cgroups to get any sort of “real” isolation with containers. Please, please don’t disable seccomp or add extra capabilities you don’t need. Happy containering! I must leave you with this gif… :D All in all, I hope this proves once again that you need more than just namespaces and cgroups to get any sort of “real” isolation with containers. Please, please don’t disable seccomp or add extra capabilities you don’t need. Happy containering! I must leave you with this gif… :D
