---
title: "Ultimate Linux on the Desktop"
date: 2017-01-16
url: https://blog.jessfraz.com/post/ultimate-linux-on-the-desktop/
slug: ultimate-linux-on-the-desktop
word_count: 1644
---

# Ultimate Linux on the Desktop Ultimate Linux on the Desktop Monday, January 16, 2017 · 4 min read #### Table of Contents Table of Contents * Base OSX11 & WaylandEverything in Containers * Base OS [Base OS](#base-os) Base OS * X11 & Wayland [X11 & Wayland](#x11-wayland) X11 & Wayland * Everything in Containers [Everything in Containers](#everything-in-containers) Everything in Containers Over the past couple of years I have set out to create the ultimate Linux on the desktop experience for myself. Obviously everyone who runs Linux has their ownopinions on things. What this post will outline ismyultimate Linux on the desktop experience. So just remember that before you get your panties in a knot on HackerNews because you live and die by Xmonad (I live and die by i3, fight me). Over the past couple of years I have set out to create the ultimate Linux on the desktop experience for myself. Obviously everyone who runs Linux has their own [opinions on things](https://misc.j3ss.co/gifs/ihaveopinionsaboutthings.gif) opinions on things . What this post will outline is *my* my ultimate Linux on the desktop experience. So just remember that before you get your panties in a knot on HackerNews because you live and die by Xmonad (I live and die by i3, fight me). First, you should already know that I run everything on my laptop in containers. I outlined this in my posts aboutDocker Containers on the DesktopandRunc Containers on the Desktop. First, you should already know that I run everything on my laptop in containers. I outlined this in my posts about [Docker Containers on the Desktop](https://blog.jessfraz.com/post/docker-containers-on-the-desktop/) Docker Containers on the Desktop and [Runc Containers on the Desktop](https://blog.jessfraz.com/post/runc-containers-on-the-desktop/) Runc Containers on the Desktop . ## Base OS Base OS I used to use Debian as my base OS but I recently decided to try and run CoreOS’ Container Linux on the desktop. Container Linux is made for servers, so obviously it doesn’t have graphics drivers. I added them and made a few other horrible tweaks that I’m sure would make some people at CoreOS cringe. I am not proud of these things but overall it worked! I used to use Debian as my base OS but I recently decided to try and run CoreOS’ Container Linux on the desktop. Container Linux is made for servers, so obviously it doesn’t have graphics drivers. I added them and made a few other horrible tweaks that I’m sure would make some people at CoreOS cringe. I am not proud of these things but overall it worked! Mostly the changes for graphics drivers were the same exact changes you would make installing Gentoo on your host: settingVIDEO_CARDS="intel i915"in/etc/portage/make.conf,emerge-ingsys-kernel/linux-firmwareetc, etc. Mostly the changes for graphics drivers were the same exact changes you would make installing Gentoo on your host: setting `VIDEO_CARDS="intel i915"` VIDEO_CARDS="intel i915" in `/etc/portage/make.conf` /etc/portage/make.conf , `emerge` emerge -ing `sys-kernel/linux-firmware` sys-kernel/linux-firmware etc, etc. Then I cut out the things I don’t need that only pertain to if you are using Container Linux on your server, cluster management tools, support request tools (lolz) etc. These were all pretty simple changes that I made to a newebuildthat I cloned from thecoreos-base/coreos ebuild. Then I cut out the things I don’t need that only pertain to if you are using Container Linux on your server, cluster management tools, support request tools (lolz) etc. These were all pretty simple changes that I made to a new `ebuild` ebuild that I cloned from the `coreos-base/coreos ebuild` coreos-base/coreos ebuild . I need to clean up the mess I’ve made of my forks of the coreos buildscripts,init,ebuilds,manifest, andbase layout. But you can checkout thedesktopbranch at each of those. I need to clean up the mess I’ve made of my forks of the coreos build [scripts](https://github.com/jessfraz/scripts) scripts , [init](https://github.com/jessfraz/init) init , [ebuilds](https://github.com/jessfraz/coreos-overlay) ebuilds , [manifest](https://github.com/jessfraz/manifest) manifest , and [base layout](https://github.com/jessfraz/baselayout) base layout . But you can checkout the `desktop` desktop branch at each of those. Let me go over some of the benefits I get from using CoreOS’ Container Linux as my base OS. Let me go over some of the benefits I get from using CoreOS’ Container Linux as my base OS. * I can build my own images, it’s Gentoo and I knowemergeso I can customize the base anyway I want. I can build my own images, it’s Gentoo and I knowemergeso I can customize the base anyway I want. I can build my own images, it’s Gentoo and I know `emerge` emerge so I can customize the base anyway I want. * CoreOS’ Container Linux uses the same auto update system as ChromeOS, which is all based onGoogle’s Omaha. So all I need to do to have auto updates for my OS is continuously release the modded version of Container Linux to an Omaha server, which I will host. (Yes I know I am insane to go through this much effort for my own laptop but whatever.) CoreOS’ Container Linux uses the same auto update system as ChromeOS, which is all based onGoogle’s Omaha. So all I need to do to have auto updates for my OS is continuously release the modded version of Container Linux to an Omaha server, which I will host. (Yes I know I am insane to go through this much effort for my own laptop but whatever.) CoreOS’ Container Linux uses the same auto update system as ChromeOS, which is all based on [Google’s Omaha](https://github.com/google/omaha) Google’s Omaha . So all I need to do to have auto updates for my OS is continuously release the modded version of Container Linux to an Omaha server, which I will host. (Yes I know I am insane to go through this much effort for my own laptop but whatever.) * The filesystem is setup perfectly for running containers, there is a read-only/usrand a stateful read/write/. The data stored on/will never be manipulated by the update process. Plus since/usris read-only it really forces you to run everything in containers. The filesystem is setup perfectly for running containers, there is a read-only/usrand a stateful read/write/. The data stored on/will never be manipulated by the update process. Plus since/usris read-only it really forces you to run everything in containers. The filesystem is setup perfectly for running containers, there is a read-only `/usr` /usr and a stateful read/write `/` / . The data stored on `/` / will never be manipulated by the update process. Plus since `/usr` /usr is read-only it really forces you to run everything in containers. * My hardware has TPM capabilities so I getTrusted Computing through Container Linux. My hardware has TPM capabilities so I getTrusted Computing through Container Linux. My hardware has TPM capabilities so I get [Trusted Computing through Container Linux](https://coreos.com/blog/coreos-trusted-computing.html) Trusted Computing through Container Linux . ## X11 & Wayland X11 & Wayland Currently this setup is using X11 but that is not the goal in the future. I plan to move it over to Wayland after theport of i3, sway,is feature compatible with i3. It’s really close to done so I can try it out currently. Currently this setup is using X11 but that is not the goal in the future. I plan to move it over to Wayland after the [port of i3, sway,](https://github.com/SirCmpwn/sway) port of i3, sway, is feature compatible with i3. It’s really close to done so I can try it out currently. This would eliminate all the problems with X being the worst, something something keylogging blah blah blah. I’m not going to go into more detail now because this is not meant to be a rant. This would eliminate all the problems with X being the worst, something something keylogging blah blah blah. I’m not going to go into more detail now because this is not meant to be a rant. ## Everything in Containers Everything in Containers I already mentioned my two other blog posts on running desktop apps with Docker and Runc, but on this laptop I wanted something better. I already mentioned my two other blog posts on running desktop apps with Docker and Runc, but on this laptop I wanted something better. You see the problem with both Docker and Runc as they are today is that they must be run as root. And I’m not talking about the processinthe container. I’m talking about the container spawner itself. You see the problem with both Docker and Runc as they are today is that they must be run as root. And I’m not talking about the process *in* in the container. I’m talking about the container spawner itself. I outlined the future ofSandbox Containersand there are patches to Runc to enablerootless containers. If you want to know more you should also watchAleksa Sarai’s talk. On this laptop I amonlyusing rootless containers. I outlined the future of [Sandbox Containers](https://blog.jessfraz.com/post/getting-towards-real-sandbox-containers/) Sandbox Containers and there are patches to Runc to enable [rootless containers](https://github.com/opencontainers/runc/pull/774) rootless containers . If you want to know more you should also watch [Aleksa Sarai’s talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r6EcUyamu94&feature=youtu.be) Aleksa Sarai’s talk . On this laptop I am *only* only using rootless containers. So overall everything runs in containers, I can automatically update my operating system, and the containers are NOT running as root on my host. This is the dream and reality. So overall everything runs in containers, I can automatically update my operating system, and the containers are NOT running as root on my host. This is the dream and reality. If you want to know all the stuff about what laptop I use you should checkout myuses this interview. If you want to know all the stuff about what laptop I use you should checkout my [uses this interview](https://usesthis.com/interviews/jessie.frazelle/) uses this interview . I gave a talk on this atCoreOS Fest 2017, check outthe videoandslides. I gave a talk on this at [CoreOS Fest 2017](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gES4-X6y278) CoreOS Fest 2017 , check out [the video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gES4-X6y278) the video and [slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/17Hml1iFqdXElxOcrh9caQSC5px5mDgaS015Vhaz42ZY/edit?usp=sharing) slides .
