---
title: "A Rant on Usable Security"
date: 2017-07-27
url: https://blog.jessfraz.com/post/a-rant-on-usable-security/
slug: a-rant-on-usable-security
word_count: 2868
---

# A Rant on Usable Security A Rant on Usable Security Thursday, July 27, 2017 · 6 min read #### Table of Contents Table of Contents * The PastThe PresentThe FutureWhy generate seccomp filters atbuild-time? * The Past [The Past](#the-past) The Past * The Present [The Present](#the-present) The Present * The FutureWhy generate seccomp filters atbuild-time? [The Future](#the-future) The Future * Why generate seccomp filters atbuild-time? * Why generate seccomp filters atbuild-time? [Why generate seccomp filters atbuild-time?](#why-generate-seccomp-filters-at-build-time) Why generate seccomp filters at **build-time** build-time ? I recently gave a talk at DevOps Days (slides) and it had a pretty great response. I’m still pretty care-mad about the topics it covered so I figured I would turn some key points from it into a blog post. I recently gave a talk at DevOps Days ( [slides](https://docs.google.com/a/jessfraz.com/presentation/d/1QnakgUC8AaNydPZCmKGYYja8gs2WoHbHRSjioIVdD9g/edit?usp=drivesdk) slides ) and it had a pretty great response. I’m still pretty care-mad about the topics it covered so I figured I would turn some key points from it into a blog post. The overall outline of the talk covered the past, present, and future of usable security. Let’s start with the past. The overall outline of the talk covered the past, present, and future of usable security. Let’s start with the past. ## The Past The Past A lot of the security tooling of the past (that we still use today) require users to jump through a lot of hoops or learn a hard to grok interface. One of the examples I used was GPG. Contrary to popular opinion, I actually don’t find GPG entirely unusable. I obviously agree that it could be easier to use, rotate keys, revoke keys blah blah blah. While I find it not exactly terrible, I can see and completely understand why the majority of criticism I hear about GPG is that it is hard to use. A lot of the security tooling of the past (that we still use today) require users to jump through a lot of hoops or learn a hard to grok interface. One of the examples I used was GPG. Contrary to popular opinion, I actually don’t find GPG entirely unusable. I obviously agree that it could be easier to use, rotate keys, revoke keys blah blah blah. While I find it not exactly terrible, I can see and completely understand why the majority of criticism I hear about GPG is that it is hard to use. There is a point at which better security comes at the expense of convenience. This needs to stop happening. Stop compromising convenience for security. Instead find the right balance between the two. Doing this takes collaboration from both security engineers and software engineers. There is a point at which better security comes at the expense of convenience. This needs to stop happening. Stop compromising convenience for security. Instead find the right balance between the two. Doing this takes collaboration from both security engineers and software engineers. Dave Cheney recently had a great tweet. Dave Cheney recently had a great tweet. Why is all software shit? Today I discovered the@duosecAPI returns 200 even if someone denies the 2fa request.— Dαve Cheney (@davecheney)July 25, 2017 > Why is all software shit? Today I discovered the@duosecAPI returns 200 even if someone denies the 2fa request.— Dαve Cheney (@davecheney)July 25, 2017 Why is all software shit? Today I discovered the@duosecAPI returns 200 even if someone denies the 2fa request. Why is all software shit? Today I discovered the [@duosec](https://twitter.com/duosec) @duosec API returns 200 even if someone denies the 2fa request. — Dαve Cheney (@davecheney) [July 25, 2017](https://twitter.com/davecheney/status/889725425781424129) July 25, 2017 I love this tweet because it reeks of the stench that only security engineers built this API. Most software engineers I know would decide to use an HTTP status code… I mean that’s what they are for. ;) I love this tweet because it reeks of the stench that only security engineers built this API. Most software engineers I know would decide to use an HTTP status code… I mean that’s what they are for. ;) When you combine expertise in different areas you build better products. This is not rocket science. However egos tend to get in the way as well as biases towards people who know and like the same things you do. I assure you, though, when security and software engineers work together truly usable security will be the outcome. When you combine expertise in different areas you build better products. This is not rocket science. However egos tend to get in the way as well as biases towards people who know and like the same things you do. I assure you, though, when security and software engineers work together truly usable security will be the outcome. ## The Present The Present A lot of the content for this portion of the talk focused on how containers make securing your infrastructure easier. I will touch on some of that but if you wish to know more you should checkout theslidesor some of my other blog posts on container security. A lot of the content for this portion of the talk focused on how containers make securing your infrastructure easier. I will touch on some of that but if you wish to know more you should checkout the [slides](https://docs.google.com/a/jessfraz.com/presentation/d/1QnakgUC8AaNydPZCmKGYYja8gs2WoHbHRSjioIVdD9g/edit?usp=drivesdk) slides or some of my other blog posts on container security. Two key features in Docker are the default AppArmor and Seccomp profiles. AppArmor and Seccomp are Linux Security Modules that are not exactly usable by someone who is unfamiliar with either. Two key features in Docker are the default AppArmor and Seccomp profiles. AppArmor and Seccomp are Linux Security Modules that are not exactly usable by someone who is unfamiliar with either. AppArmor can control and audit various process actions such as file (read, write, execute, etc) and system functions (mount, network tcp, etc). It has its own meta language, so to speak, and I actually have a repo that changes the docs for it to more a readable format via a cron job:github.com/jessfraz/apparmor-docs. The default profile for AppArmor does super sane things like preventing writing to/proc/{num},/proc/sys,/sysand preventingmountto name a few. AppArmor can control and audit various process actions such as file (read, write, execute, etc) and system functions (mount, network tcp, etc). It has its own meta language, so to speak, and I actually have a repo that changes the docs for it to more a readable format via a cron job: [github.com/jessfraz/apparmor-docs](https://github.com/jessfraz/apparmor-docs) github.com/jessfraz/apparmor-docs . The default profile for AppArmor does super sane things like preventing writing to `/proc/{num}` /proc/{num} , `/proc/sys` /proc/sys , `/sys` /sys and preventing `mount` mount to name a few. Syscall filters allow an application to define what syscalls it allows or denies. The default in Docker is a whitelist that I initially wrote. Some of the key things it blocks are: Syscall filters allow an application to define what syscalls it allows or denies. The default in Docker is a whitelist that I initially wrote. Some of the key things it blocks are: * add_key,keyctl,request_key: Prevent containers from using the kernel keyring, which is not namespaced. I wrote a blog post onTwo Objects not Namespaced by the Linux Kerneland the keyring was one I mentioned. `add_key` add_key , `keyctl` keyctl , `request_key` request_key : Prevent containers from using the kernel keyring, which is not namespaced. I wrote a blog post on [Two Objects not Namespaced by the Linux Kernel](https://blog.jessfraz.com/post/two-objects-not-namespaced-linux-kernel/) Two Objects not Namespaced by the Linux Kernel and the keyring was one I mentioned. * clone,unshare: Deny cloning new namespaces. Also gated byCAP_SYS_ADMINforCLONE_*flags, exceptCLONE_USERNS. I specifically wanted to block cloning new user namespaces inside containers because they are notorious for being points of entry for kernel bugs. `clone` clone , `unshare` unshare : Deny cloning new namespaces. Also gated by `CAP_SYS_ADMIN` CAP_SYS_ADMIN for `CLONE_*` CLONE_* flags, except `CLONE_USERNS` CLONE_USERNS . I specifically wanted to block cloning new user namespaces inside containers because they are notorious for being points of entry for kernel bugs. There also is anentire document that I started in the docker repothat outlines what we block and why. There also is an [entire document that I started in the docker repo](https://github.com/moby/moby/blob/52f32818df8bad647e4c331878fa44317e724939/docs/security/seccomp.md#syscalls-blocked-by-the-default-profile) entire document that I started in the docker repo that outlines what we block and why. Having written the default seccomp profile for Docker I am pretty familiar with how hard this would be for other people. It requires a deep knowledge of the application being contained and the syscalls it requires. This was also a quite terrifying feature to add to Docker. When I added it, Docker was already very popular and if anything would break in a big way it would be on the front page of hacker news and all the maintainers would have a very bad day. So turning on something that willEPERMby default if we left out any important syscall is terrifying. I had stress nightmares for weeks. In the end everything went much smoother than I feared but that was also after HEAVY HEAVY testing. Luckily I run super obscure things in containers so I even caught that we left outsendandrecvright before the release by running Skype (a 32 bit application) in a container. Having written the default seccomp profile for Docker I am pretty familiar with how hard this would be for other people. It requires a deep knowledge of the application being contained and the syscalls it requires. This was also a quite terrifying feature to add to Docker. When I added it, Docker was already very popular and if anything would break in a big way it would be on the front page of hacker news and all the maintainers would have a very bad day. So turning on something that will `EPERM` EPERM by default if we left out any important syscall is terrifying. I had stress nightmares for weeks. In the end everything went much smoother than I feared but that was also after HEAVY HEAVY testing. Luckily I run super obscure things in containers so I even caught that we left out `send` send and `recv` recv right before the release by running Skype (a 32 bit application) in a container. By making a default for all containers, we can secure a very large amount of users without them even realizing it’s happening. This leads perfectly into my ideas for the future and continuing this motion of making security on by default and invisible to users. By making a default for all containers, we can secure a very large amount of users without them even realizing it’s happening. This leads perfectly into my ideas for the future and continuing this motion of making security on by default and invisible to users. ## The Future The Future I tend to have pretty weird brain child ideas and this is one of them. I started thinking about where else a kernel feature like seccomp could easily be integrated and used by a large number of people. The answer is… programming languages. I do work with the Go team and as a full content warning none of this crazy that follows is in any way endorsed by them. ;) I tend to have pretty weird brain child ideas and this is one of them. I started thinking about where else a kernel feature like seccomp could easily be integrated and used by a large number of people. The answer is… programming languages. I do work with the Go team and as a full content warning none of this crazy that follows is in any way endorsed by them. ;) The idea I had is to dobuild-time generatedseccomp filters that will beapplied on run. The idea I had is to do **build-time generated** build-time generated seccomp filters that will be **applied on run** applied on run . #### Why generate seccomp filters atbuild-time? Why generate seccomp filters at **build-time** build-time ? Generating security filters/profiles at runtime has been done in the past & failed… over and over and over again. Something is always missed while profiling the application. You cannot guarantee that everything that your application will do will be called while in this profiling phase. Unless of course you have 100% test coverage, which if you do: Good For You. When the “thing that was missed” is called and blocked, users will just turn off the “security.” This happens all the time with things like SELinux and AppArmor. Generating security filters/profiles at runtime has been done in the past & failed… over and over and over again. Something is always missed while profiling the application. You cannot guarantee that everything that your application will do will be called while in this profiling phase. Unless of course you have 100% test coverage, which if you do: Good For You. When the “thing that was missed” is called and blocked, users will just turn off the “security.” This happens all the time with things like SELinux and AppArmor. By generating filters at build-time we can ensure ALL code is included in the filter. I wrote a POC of this and I showed it atKiwicon. By generating filters at build-time we can ensure ALL code is included in the filter. I wrote a POC of this and I showed it at [Kiwicon](https://kiwicon.org/the-con/talks/#e253) Kiwicon . There are three problems though. There are three problems though. * Executing other binaries. I can’t know what syscalls the binary being called is going to use so we are back at square one.package main import ( "fmt" "log" "os/exec" ) func main() { cmd := exec.Command("myprogram") out, err := cmd.CombinedOutput() if err != nil { log.Fatal(err) } fmt.Printf("%s\n", out) } Executing other binaries. I can’t know what syscalls the binary being called is going to use so we are back at square one. Executing other binaries. I can’t know what syscalls the binary being called is going to use so we are back at square one. ``` package main import ( "fmt" "log" "os/exec" ) func main() { cmd := exec.Command("myprogram") out, err := cmd.CombinedOutput() if err != nil { log.Fatal(err) } fmt.Printf("%s\n", out) } ``` package main import ( "fmt" "log" "os/exec" ) func main() { cmd := exec.Command("myprogram") out, err := cmd.CombinedOutput() if err != nil { log.Fatal(err) } fmt.Printf("%s\n", out) } * Plugins. This problem is solvable in thatifthis feature was to exist we could export at the plugin build time the seccomp filters to a field in the ELF binary or something similar.func main() { p, err := plugin.Open("plugin_name.so") if err != nil { log.Fatal(err) } v, err := p.Lookup("V") if err != nil { log.Fatal(err) } fmt.Printf("%#v\n", v) } Plugins. This problem is solvable in thatifthis feature was to exist we could export at the plugin build time the seccomp filters to a field in the ELF binary or something similar. Plugins. This problem is solvable in that *if* if this feature was to exist we could export at the plugin build time the seccomp filters to a field in the ELF binary or something similar. ``` func main() { p, err := plugin.Open("plugin_name.so") if err != nil { log.Fatal(err) } v, err := p.Lookup("V") if err != nil { log.Fatal(err) } fmt.Printf("%#v\n", v) } ``` func main() { p, err := plugin.Open("plugin_name.so") if err != nil { log.Fatal(err) } v, err := p.Lookup("V") if err != nil { log.Fatal(err) } fmt.Printf("%#v\n", v) } * Sending arbitrary arguments tosyscall.RawSyscalland similar.func main() { if len(os.Args) <= 3 { log.Fatal("must pass 4 arguments to syscall.RawSyscall") } r1, r2, errno := syscall.RawSyscall(strToUintptr(os.Args[0]), strToUintptr(os.Args[1]), strToUintptr(os.Args[2]), strToUintptr(os.Args[3])) if errno != 0 { log.Fatalf("errno: %#v", errno) } fmt.Printf("r1: %#v\nr2: %#v\n", r1, r2) } func strToUintptr(s string) uintptr { return *(*uintptr)(unsafe.Pointer(&s)) } Sending arbitrary arguments tosyscall.RawSyscalland similar. Sending arbitrary arguments to `syscall.RawSyscall` syscall.RawSyscall and similar. ``` func main() { if len(os.Args) <= 3 { log.Fatal("must pass 4 arguments to syscall.RawSyscall") } r1, r2, errno := syscall.RawSyscall(strToUintptr(os.Args[0]), strToUintptr(os.Args[1]), strToUintptr(os.Args[2]), strToUintptr(os.Args[3])) if errno != 0 { log.Fatalf("errno: %#v", errno) } fmt.Printf("r1: %#v\nr2: %#v\n", r1, r2) } func strToUintptr(s string) uintptr { return *(*uintptr)(unsafe.Pointer(&s)) } ``` func main() { if len(os.Args) <= 3 { log.Fatal("must pass 4 arguments to syscall.RawSyscall") } r1, r2, errno := syscall.RawSyscall(strToUintptr(os.Args[0]), strToUintptr(os.Args[1]), strToUintptr(os.Args[2]), strToUintptr(os.Args[3])) if errno != 0 { log.Fatalf("errno: %#v", errno) } fmt.Printf("r1: %#v\nr2: %#v\n", r1, r2) } func strToUintptr(s string) uintptr { return *(*uintptr)(unsafe.Pointer(&s)) } While this is not perfect by any stretch of the imagination I believe it should open your mind to whatcouldbe possible in the future. Hopefully my dream of making binaries sandbox themselves will eventually get there. I know I won’t stop until it does. ;) Overall, I would like you to remember to find the right balance between secure AND usable. Don’t break users and get security engineering and software engineering working together! While this is not perfect by any stretch of the imagination I believe it should open your mind to what *could* could be possible in the future. Hopefully my dream of making binaries sandbox themselves will eventually get there. I know I won’t stop until it does. ;) Overall, I would like you to remember to find the right balance between secure AND usable. Don’t break users and get security engineering and software engineering working together!
