---
title: "Personal Infrastructure"
date: 2017-12-16
url: https://blog.jessfraz.com/post/personal-infrastructure/
slug: personal-infrastructure
word_count: 1911
---

# Personal Infrastructure Personal Infrastructure Saturday, December 16, 2017 · 5 min read #### Table of Contents Table of Contents * Continuous IntegrationPrivate Docker RegistryGit Serverghb0tIRC BouncerupmailiPythonConclusion * Continuous IntegrationPrivate Docker RegistryGit Serverghb0tIRC BouncerupmailiPythonConclusion * Continuous Integration [Continuous Integration](#continuous-integration) Continuous Integration * Private Docker Registry [Private Docker Registry](#private-docker-registry) Private Docker Registry * Git Server [Git Server](#git-server) Git Server * ghb0t [ghb0t](#ghb0t) ghb0t * IRC Bouncer [IRC Bouncer](#irc-bouncer) IRC Bouncer * upmail [upmail](#upmail) upmail * iPython [iPython](#ipython) iPython * Conclusion [Conclusion](#conclusion) Conclusion This post is kind of like “part two” on my series on all the weird things I do for my personal infrastructure. If you missed “part one”, you should check outHome Lab is the Dopest Lab. This post is kind of like “part two” on my series on all the weird things I do for my personal infrastructure. If you missed “part one”, you should check out [Home Lab is the Dopest Lab](https://blog.jessfraz.com/post/home-lab-is-the-dopest-lab/) Home Lab is the Dopest Lab . I run a lot of little things to make my life easier, like a CI, some bots, and a bunch of services just for the lolz. This post will go over all of those. These run scattered across my NUCs and the cloud. I run a lot of little things to make my life easier, like a CI, some bots, and a bunch of services just for the lolz. This post will go over all of those. These run scattered across my NUCs and the cloud. Let’s start with the most useful. Let’s start with the most useful. ### Continuous Integration Continuous Integration I host my own continuous integration server. Yes, you guessed it… it’s Jenkins. I use the Jenkins DSL plugin to keep everything in sync. You can find all my DSLs in my repogithub.com/jessfraz/jenkins-dsl. This has all the configurations for views, keeps forks up to date, mirrors all my repositories to private git (more on this ingit), builds all Dockerfiles to push to Docker Hub and my private registry (more on this inprivate docker registry) and a bunch of maintenance scripts. I host my own continuous integration server. Yes, you guessed it… it’s Jenkins. I use the Jenkins DSL plugin to keep everything in sync. You can find all my DSLs in my repo [github.com/jessfraz/jenkins-dsl](https://github.com/jessfraz/jenkins-dsl) github.com/jessfraz/jenkins-dsl . This has all the configurations for views, keeps forks up to date, mirrors all my repositories to private git (more on this in [git](#git-server) git ), builds all Dockerfiles to push to Docker Hub and my private registry (more on this in [private docker registry](#private-docker-registry) private docker registry ) and a bunch of maintenance scripts. TheMakefilein this repo calls out to bash scripts which generate new DSLs for any new GitHub repos I create. Yep I even generate the automation… The [Makefile](https://github.com/jessfraz/jenkins-dsl/blob/master/Makefile) Makefile in this repo calls out to bash scripts which generate new DSLs for any new GitHub repos I create. Yep I even generate the automation… There’s a bunch of other fun things in there as well that you can discover by poking around yourself. There’s a bunch of other fun things in there as well that you can discover by poking around yourself. I host my own postfix server alongside Jenkins. You can find the postfix docker image atr.j3ss.co/postfixor theDockerfile. It’s super minimal and less gross than literally every other postfix image in existence. I host my own postfix server alongside Jenkins. You can find the postfix docker image at `r.j3ss.co/postfix` r.j3ss.co/postfix or the [Dockerfile](https://github.com/jessfraz/dockerfiles/tree/master/postfix) Dockerfile . It’s super minimal and less gross than literally every other postfix image in existence. You can run it with: You can run it with: ``` $ docker run --restart always -d \ --name postfix \ --net container:jenkins \ -e "[email protected]" \ -e "RELAY=[smtp-relay.gmail.com]:587" \ -e "TLS=1" \ -e "MY_DESTINATION=...., localhost" \ -e "MAILNAME=blah.com" \ r.j3ss.co/postfix ``` $ docker run --restart always -d \ --name postfix \ --net container:jenkins \ -e " [[email protected]](/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection) [email protected] " \ -e "RELAY=[smtp-relay.gmail.com]:587" \ -e "TLS=1" \ -e "MY_DESTINATION=...., localhost" \ -e "MAILNAME=blah.com" \ r.j3ss.co/postfix ### Private Docker Registry Private Docker Registry I host my own private docker registry with my own notary server and authentication server. Why? Well because about 4 years ago when I started using docker, Docker Hub was super slow and I came to love having my own super fast one. I host my own private docker registry with my own notary server and authentication server. Why? Well because about 4 years ago when I started using docker, Docker Hub was super slow and I came to love having my own super fast one. I still push all the images to both Docker Hub and my registry and both are signed so it’s really like I am using Docker Hub as my backup. Yay, highly available… just kidding. I still push all the images to both Docker Hub and my registry and both are signed so it’s really like I am using Docker Hub as my backup. Yay, highly available… just kidding. I made a pretty shitty UI for it. You can play with it atr.j3ss.co. The UI is from myregproject but the server component lives in theserver subdirectory. I made a pretty shitty UI for it. You can play with it at [r.j3ss.co](https://r.j3ss.co/) r.j3ss.co . The UI is from my [reg](https://github.com/jessfraz/reg) reg project but the server component lives in the [server subdirectory](https://github.com/jessfraz/reg/tree/master/server) server subdirectory . The really nice thing about both theregcommand line and server is that you can get a list of CVEs on an image. The really nice thing about both the `reg` reg command line and server is that you can get a list of CVEs on an image. I do this by hosting my own instance ofCoreOS’s Clair. I do this by hosting my own instance of [CoreOS’s Clair](https://github.com/coreos/clair) CoreOS’s Clair . Most of my Dockerfiles live atgithub.com/jessfraz/dockerfilesif you are curious. Most of my Dockerfiles live at [github.com/jessfraz/dockerfiles](https://github.com/jessfraz/dockerfiles) github.com/jessfraz/dockerfiles if you are curious. I also went over all of this on my talk onOver Engineering my Laptop / Container Linux on the Desktop. This includes all the reasons why I have continuous integration as well. I also went over all of this on my talk on [Over Engineering my Laptop / Container Linux on the Desktop](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/17Hml1iFqdXElxOcrh9caQSC5px5mDgaS015Vhaz42ZY/edit?usp=sharing) Over Engineering my Laptop / Container Linux on the Desktop . This includes all the reasons why I have continuous integration as well. I have a script to cleanup the registry of old imagesclean-registry. This deletes old registry blobs that are not used in the latest version of the tag. I don’t really care about old images and I don’t want to have a huge registry filled with old shit. There is ajenkins DSLto run this. I have a script to cleanup the registry of old images [clean-registry](https://github.com/jessfraz/dotfiles/blob/master/bin/clean-registry) clean-registry . This deletes old registry blobs that are not used in the latest version of the tag. I don’t really care about old images and I don’t want to have a huge registry filled with old shit. There is a [jenkins DSL](https://github.com/jessfraz/jenkins-dsl/blob/master/projects/maintenance/garbage_collect_registry.groovy) jenkins DSL to run this. ### Git Server Git Server I host my own git server. You can find the gitserver docker image atr.j3ss.co/gitserveror theDockerfile. I host my own git server. You can find the gitserver docker image at `r.j3ss.co/gitserver` r.j3ss.co/gitserver or the [Dockerfile](https://github.com/jessfraz/dockerfiles/tree/master/gitserver) Dockerfile . You can run it with: You can run it with: ``` $ docker run --restart always -d \ --name gitserver \ -p 127.0.0.1:22:22 \ -e "PUBKEY=$(cat ~/.ssh/authorized_keys)" \ -v "/mnt/disks/gitserver:/home/git" \ r.j3ss.co/gitserver ``` $ docker run --restart always -d \ --name gitserver \ -p 127.0.0.1:22:22 \ -e "PUBKEY=$(cat ~/.ssh/authorized_keys)" \ -v "/mnt/disks/gitserver:/home/git" \ r.j3ss.co/gitserver It has it’s own UI that is run with Gitiles. You can find the Gitiles docker image atr.j3ss.co/gitilesor theDockerfile. It has it’s own UI that is run with Gitiles. You can find the Gitiles docker image at `r.j3ss.co/gitiles` r.j3ss.co/gitiles or the [Dockerfile](https://github.com/jessfraz/dockerfiles/tree/master/gitiles) Dockerfile . You can run it with: You can run it with: ``` $ docker run --restart always -d \ --name gitiles \ -p 127.0.0.1:8080:8080 \ -e BASE_GIT_URL="[email protected]" \ -e SITE_TITLE="git.blah.com" \ -v "/mnt/disks/gitserver:/home/git" \ -w /home/git \ r.j3ss.co/gitiles ``` $ docker run --restart always -d \ --name gitiles \ -p 127.0.0.1:8080:8080 \ -e BASE_GIT_URL=" [[email protected]](/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection) [email protected] " \ -e SITE_TITLE="git.blah.com" \ -v "/mnt/disks/gitserver:/home/git" \ -w /home/git \ r.j3ss.co/gitiles ### ghb0t ghb0t This is one of my most useful things. It’s a GitHub Bot to automatically delete your fork’s branches after a pull request has been merged. This is one of my most useful things. It’s a GitHub Bot to automatically delete your fork’s branches after a pull request has been merged. I amsoOCD about keeping git repos clean and this is my little helper. I am *so* so OCD about keeping git repos clean and this is my little helper. Check out the repo:github.com/jessfraz/ghb0t. Check out the repo: [github.com/jessfraz/ghb0t](https://github.com/jessfraz/ghb0t) github.com/jessfraz/ghb0t . I go to fork your thing and there is like 300 branches my face is likepic.twitter.com/JpdpO447KS— jessie frazelle (@jessfraz)January 23, 2017 > I go to fork your thing and there is like 300 branches my face is likepic.twitter.com/JpdpO447KS— jessie frazelle (@jessfraz)January 23, 2017 I go to fork your thing and there is like 300 branches my face is likepic.twitter.com/JpdpO447KS I go to fork your thing and there is like 300 branches my face is like [pic.twitter.com/JpdpO447KS](https://t.co/JpdpO447KS) pic.twitter.com/JpdpO447KS — jessie frazelle (@jessfraz) [January 23, 2017](https://twitter.com/jessfraz/status/823425160787021825?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw) January 23, 2017 ### IRC Bouncer IRC Bouncer I host my own IRC Bouncer with ZNC. You can find the ZNC docker image atr.j3ss.co/zncor theDockerfile. I host my own IRC Bouncer with ZNC. You can find the ZNC docker image at `r.j3ss.co/znc` r.j3ss.co/znc or the [Dockerfile](https://github.com/jessfraz/dockerfiles/tree/master/znc) Dockerfile . You can run it with: You can run it with: ``` $ docker run --restart always -d \ --name znc \ -p 6697:6697 \ -v "/mnt/disks/znc:/home/user/.znc" \ r.j3ss.co/znc ``` $ docker run --restart always -d \ --name znc \ -p 6697:6697 \ -v "/mnt/disks/znc:/home/user/.znc" \ r.j3ss.co/znc ### upmail upmail This service provides email notifications forsourcegraph/checkup. If you are unfamiliar with checkup… it’s distributed, lock-free, self-hosted health checks and status pages, written in Go. This service provides email notifications for [sourcegraph/checkup](https://github.com/sourcegraph/checkup) sourcegraph/checkup . If you are unfamiliar with checkup… it’s distributed, lock-free, self-hosted health checks and status pages, written in Go. I wrote a small little server to send email alerts for it and it lives atgithub.com/jessfraz/upmail. I wrote a small little server to send email alerts for it and it lives at [github.com/jessfraz/upmail](https://github.com/jessfraz/upmail) github.com/jessfraz/upmail . ### iPython iPython Not really all that novel but I also run an iPython server for doing little script things in. I just use thejupyter/minimal-notebookDocker image for that. Not really all that novel but I also run an iPython server for doing little script things in. I just use the `jupyter/minimal-notebook` jupyter/minimal-notebook Docker image for that. ### Conclusion Conclusion I run a lot of little shitty services for a personalpastebinand other things but those are all really less cool. My attention span for blog posts is about 5 minutes and we have runneth over so I am going to call it a day with this… until next time. Peace out. I run a lot of little shitty services for a personal [pastebin](https://github.com/jessfraz/pastebinit) pastebin and other things but those are all really less cool. My attention span for blog posts is about 5 minutes and we have runneth over so I am going to call it a day with this… until next time. Peace out.
