---
title: "You might not need Kubernetes"
date: 2018-11-05
url: https://blog.jessfraz.com/post/you-might-not-need-k8s/
slug: you-might-not-need-k8s
word_count: 662
---

# You might not need Kubernetes You might not need Kubernetes Monday, November 5, 2018 · 2 min read #### Table of Contents Table of Contents * Use Containerd * Use Containerd [Use Containerd](#use-containerd) Use Containerd I have realized recently that a lot of people think I am just a shill for Kubernetes and I am not. What I have done is write a few blog posts on some interesting problems to be solved in Kubernetes.ButI would like to emphasize that those problems are pretty exclusive to the way Kubernetes was designed and you could easily build your own orchestrator without them. I have realized recently that a lot of people think I am just a shill for Kubernetes and I am not. What I have done is write a few blog posts on some interesting problems to be solved in Kubernetes. *But* But I would like to emphasize that those problems are pretty exclusive to the way Kubernetes was designed and you could easily build your own orchestrator without them. ## Use Containerd Use Containerd If you need an example of a custom, minimal orchestrator with containerd you should checkoutstellar. If you need an example of a custom, minimal orchestrator with containerd you should checkout [stellar](https://github.com/ehazlett/stellar/) stellar . Or see mydesign doc for a multi-tenant orchestrator. Or see my [design doc for a multi-tenant orchestrator](https://blog.jessfraz.com/post/secret-design-docs-multi-tenant-orchestrator/) design doc for a multi-tenant orchestrator . I’ll let you dive into that in your own time though. Let’s take a new look at a blog post I wrote aboutBuilding images securely on Kubernetes. I’ll let you dive into that in your own time though. Let’s take a new look at a blog post I wrote about [Building images securely on Kubernetes](https://blog.jessfraz.com/post/building-container-images-securely-on-kubernetes/) Building images securely on Kubernetes . I feel like I should have more clearly stated how this problem is pretty exclusive to Kubernetes. It’s also not really a hard problem. The hard problem I was solving in that post wasnothow to build images on Kubernetes but how to build images as an unprivileged user in Linux.Thatis a hard problem. And a serious problem for companies who don’t allow root on their machines. I feel like I should have more clearly stated how this problem is pretty exclusive to Kubernetes. It’s also not really a hard problem. The hard problem I was solving in that post was *not* not how to build images on Kubernetes but how to build images as an unprivileged user in Linux. *That* That is a hard problem. And a serious problem for companies who don’t allow root on their machines. The easier choice if all you need to do is build an imageandyou are already using containerd, is to runbuildkiton the same machine and then you can use the buildkit API library to build your dockerfiles. The easier choice if all you need to do is build an image *and* and you are already using containerd, is to run [buildkit](https://github.com/moby/buildkit) buildkit on the same machine and then you can use the buildkit API library to build your dockerfiles. Or just run docker-in-docker, I have done this for years on my CI with absolutely no problems. Or just run docker-in-docker, I have done this for years on my CI with absolutely no problems. Anyways, the point I am trying to make is you should use whatever is the easiest thing for your use case and not just what is popular on the internet. With complexity comes a steep learning curve and with a massive number of pluggable layers comes yak shaves until the end of time. Anyways, the point I am trying to make is you should use whatever is the easiest thing for your use case and not just what is popular on the internet. With complexity comes a steep learning curve and with a massive number of pluggable layers comes yak shaves until the end of time. Think for yourselves, don’t be sheep. Think for yourselves, don’t be sheep.
