---
title: "Nerd Sniped by BINFMT_MISC"
date: 2018-03-04
url: https://blog.jessfraz.com/post/nerd-sniped-by-binfmt_misc/
slug: nerd-sniped-by-binfmt_misc
word_count: 1196
---

# Nerd Sniped by BINFMT_MISC Nerd Sniped by BINFMT_MISC Sunday, March 4, 2018 · 3 min read This is a story about how I got nerd sniped bya blog post from Cloudflare Engineering. The TLDR on their post is that you can script in Go if you use BINFMT_MISC in the kernel. This is a story about how I got nerd sniped by [a blog post from Cloudflare Engineering](https://blog.cloudflare.com/using-go-as-a-scripting-language-in-linux/) a blog post from Cloudflare Engineering . The TLDR on their post is that you can script in Go if you use BINFMT_MISC in the kernel. BINFMT_MISCis really well documented and awesome. In the end, all they had to do to script in Go was to mount the filesystem: [BINFMT_MISC](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/v4.14/admin-guide/binfmt-misc.html) BINFMT_MISC is really well documented and awesome. In the end, all they had to do to script in Go was to mount the filesystem: ``` $ mount binfmt_misc -t binfmt_misc /proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc ``` $ mount binfmt_misc -t binfmt_misc /proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc Then, register the Go script binary format: Then, register the Go script binary format: ``` $ echo ':golang:E::go::/usr/local/bin/gorun:OC' | sudo tee /proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc/register :golang:E::go::/usr/local/bin/gorun:OC ``` $ echo ':golang:E::go::/usr/local/bin/gorun:OC' | sudo tee /proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc/register :golang:E::go::/usr/local/bin/gorun:OC Then you can./any go file on your host: Then you can `./` ./ any go file on your host: ``` $ chmod u+x helloscript.go $ ./helloscript.go Hello, world! ``` $ chmod u+x helloscript.go $ ./helloscript.go Hello, world! They go through all the extraordinary details of exit codes for the shell and blah blah blah. It’s a great post you should really read it. Do it, go read it, then come back here and I will take it to 11. They go through all the extraordinary details of exit codes for the shell and blah blah blah. It’s a great post you should really read it. Do it, go read it, then come back here and I will take it to 11. … … Okay, cool, you are back. That post was dope right? Okay, cool, you are back. That post was dope right? I kinda want to do this with all languages. Because I LOVE SCRIPTING. Have you seen mycloud native dotfiles? My bash scripts smell like roses. I kinda want to do this with all languages. Because I LOVE SCRIPTING. Have you seen my [cloud native dotfiles](https://github.com/jessfraz/dotfiles) cloud native dotfiles ? My bash scripts smell like roses. Right, so I want to do this withalllanguages… but what I also hate is installing shit on my host. Ew, we have containers for those silly things. Luckily, I know a thing or two about containers… Right, so I want to do this with *all* all languages… but what I also hate is installing shit on my host. Ew, we have containers for those silly things. Luckily, I know a thing or two about containers… A few years ago I made a project calledbinctr. It creates fully static, unprivileged, self-contained, containers as executable binaries. (Wow that was a lot of words, let’s break it down.) Whatbinctrdoes is embed an entire container image (aka rootfs)intoa fully static binary and when you execute the binary it will unpack the image and run it as a container. So you get containers without a daemon or privileges and without even having the image for the rootfs of the container. You just need this one binary. A few years ago I made a project called [binctr](https://github.com/jessfraz/binctr) binctr . It creates fully static, unprivileged, self-contained, containers as executable binaries. (Wow that was a lot of words, let’s break it down.) What `binctr` binctr does is embed an entire container image (aka rootfs) *into* into a fully static binary and when you execute the binary it will unpack the image and run it as a container. So you get containers without a daemon or privileges and without even having the image for the rootfs of the container. You just need this one binary. (Huge thanks to@lordcypharwho got rootless containers into runc so I could actually archive my gross hack forbinctr.) (Huge thanks to [@lordcyphar](https://twitter.com/lordcyphar) @lordcyphar who got rootless containers into runc so I could actually archive my gross hack for `binctr` binctr .) Kinda seems like the perfect match for trying to use all languages with BINFMT_MISC. So I tried it. Kinda seems like the perfect match for trying to use all languages with BINFMT_MISC. So I tried it. (Preface: this post should not be tried at home, which is why I did not unarchivebinctr, I am merely showing a different, very crazy abstraction). (Preface: this post should not be tried at home, which is why I did not unarchive `binctr` binctr , I am merely showing a different, very crazy abstraction). I put common lisp in a container. Why common lisp? Well I could do this withany languageand I’m a bit insane haven’t you noticed… I put common lisp in a container. Why common lisp? Well I could do this with *any language* any language and I’m a bit insane haven’t you noticed… Then I embedded the image into a binary withbinctr. I made one slight modification to the spec inbinctrthat allowed me to use local files, basically so I could get the script into the container after the executable is run pointing to the file. Then I embedded the image into a binary with `binctr` binctr . I made one slight modification to the spec in `binctr` binctr that allowed me to use local files, basically so I could get the script into the container after the executable is run pointing to the file. Then I registered my common lisp binary format with BINFMT_MISC… Then I registered my common lisp binary format with BINFMT_MISC… ``` $ echo ':clisp:E::lisp::/usr/local/bin/clisp:OC' | sudo tee /proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc/register :clisp:E::lisp::/usr/local/bin/clisp:OC ``` $ echo ':clisp:E::lisp::/usr/local/bin/clisp:OC' | sudo tee /proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc/register :clisp:E::lisp::/usr/local/bin/clisp:OC /usr/local/bin/clispis just mybinctrgenerated binary with common lisp. `/usr/local/bin/clisp` /usr/local/bin/clisp is just my `binctr` binctr generated binary with common lisp. And boom, now I can “dot slash” any.lispfile and it will run in my common lisp container. And boom, now I can “dot slash” any `.lisp` .lisp file and it will run in my common lisp container. Obviously, my container needed to be packaged with any dependencies and packages I needed but I didn’t need to install any of that shit on my host so I consider it a win. Obviously, my container needed to be packaged with any dependencies and packages I needed but I didn’t need to install any of that shit on my host so I consider it a win. Imagine if an entire OS had all the languages packaged this way so that everything could be “dot slashed” and executed but without actually installing the language to your host operating system. Imagine if an entire OS had all the languages packaged this way so that everything could be “dot slashed” and executed but without actually installing the language to your host operating system. I think it would be dope. I think it would be dope. Thanks for tuning in for this crazy blog post. Catch ya later. Hacker news, you can shove your comments right up your Thanks for tuning in for this crazy blog post. Catch ya later. Hacker news, you can shove your comments right up your
