---
title: "An Enigma, unikernels booting on RISC-V, a rack encased in liquid. OH MY."
date: 2019-03-17
url: https://blog.jessfraz.com/post/enigma-unikernels-risc-v-oh-my/
slug: enigma-unikernels-risc-v-oh-my
word_count: 1924
---

# An Enigma, unikernels booting on RISC-V, a rack encased in liquid. OH MY. An Enigma, unikernels booting on RISC-V, a rack encased in liquid. OH MY. Sunday, March 17, 2019 · 4 min read #### Table of Contents Table of Contents * QCon and University of CambridgeOpen Compute SummitBoot GuardServer rack encased in liquid * QCon and University of Cambridge [QCon and University of Cambridge](#qcon-and-university-of-cambridge) QCon and University of Cambridge * Open Compute SummitBoot GuardServer rack encased in liquid [Open Compute Summit](#open-compute-summit) Open Compute Summit * Boot Guard [Boot Guard](#boot-guard) Boot Guard * Server rack encased in liquid [Server rack encased in liquid](#server-rack-encased-in-liquid) Server rack encased in liquid I have written a bit about how I am spending my time while being unemployed and I thought I would continue. I have written a bit about how I am spending my time while being unemployed and I thought I would continue. There was one thing I had left out of myprevious post on my visit to the Pentagon. THEY HAVE A REAL ENIGMA MACHINE THERE. Okay, moving on… There was one thing I had left out of my [previous post on my visit to the Pentagon](https://blog.jessfraz.com/post/government-medicine-capitalism/) previous post on my visit to the Pentagon . THEY HAVE A REAL ENIGMA MACHINE THERE. Okay, moving on… ## QCon and University of Cambridge QCon and University of Cambridge I gave a talk at QCon on SGX and ended up giving the same talk to some really awesome folks at University of Cambridge. Each time I gave the talk provoked some really interesting conversations. One of the topics that came up a couple of times was if RISC-V was going to be supported by any major cloud provider anytime soon. My honest opinion, which some might disagree with, is this is years away BUT it would certainly help adoption and integration into projects if it was backed by a company with a lot of time to develop integrations. Also I got a bit nerd sniped by some ARM folks and researchers to look more into TrustZone (which is the ARM secure enclave). I haven’t dug in yet but it’s on my list. I gave a talk at QCon on SGX and ended up giving the same talk to some really awesome folks at University of Cambridge. Each time I gave the talk provoked some really interesting conversations. One of the topics that came up a couple of times was if RISC-V was going to be supported by any major cloud provider anytime soon. My honest opinion, which some might disagree with, is this is years away BUT it would certainly help adoption and integration into projects if it was backed by a company with a lot of time to develop integrations. Also I got a bit nerd sniped by some ARM folks and researchers to look more into TrustZone (which is the ARM secure enclave). I haven’t dug in yet but it’s on my list. It was awesome spending a day in Cambridge (thanksAnilfor the tour!) and learning about all the awesome things they are doing. The MirageOS team is booting unikernels on baremetal RISC-V! It was awesome spending a day in Cambridge (thanks [Anil](https://twitter.com/avsm) Anil for the tour!) and learning about all the awesome things they are doing. The MirageOS team is booting unikernels on baremetal RISC-V! 🎉OCaml boots on bare-metal@ShaktiProcessor@risc_v! 🎉 An important milestone towards building safer apps using@OpenMirageon open source hardware.pic.twitter.com/XFosAxPROR— KC Sivaramakrishnan (@kc_srk)March 1, 2019 > 🎉OCaml boots on bare-metal@ShaktiProcessor@risc_v! 🎉 An important milestone towards building safer apps using@OpenMirageon open source hardware.pic.twitter.com/XFosAxPROR— KC Sivaramakrishnan (@kc_srk)March 1, 2019 🎉OCaml boots on bare-metal@ShaktiProcessor@risc_v! 🎉 An important milestone towards building safer apps using@OpenMirageon open source hardware.pic.twitter.com/XFosAxPROR 🎉OCaml boots on bare-metal [@ShaktiProcessor](https://twitter.com/ShaktiProcessor?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw) @ShaktiProcessor [@risc_v](https://twitter.com/risc_v?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw) @risc_v ! 🎉 An important milestone towards building safer apps using [@OpenMirage](https://twitter.com/OpenMirage?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw) @OpenMirage on open source hardware. [pic.twitter.com/XFosAxPROR](https://t.co/XFosAxPROR) pic.twitter.com/XFosAxPROR — KC Sivaramakrishnan (@kc_srk) [March 1, 2019](https://twitter.com/kc_srk/status/1101479406084583424?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw) March 1, 2019 They use this on boards to power light bulbs (at the University!) super securely since it removes the need for all the shitty firmware most other things ship and has a super minimal environment. I’m sure you can think of a number of different other use cases as well. Honestly, unikernels replacing all the crap firmware in the world would be a huge win. They use this on boards to power light bulbs (at the University!) super securely since it removes the need for all the shitty firmware most other things ship and has a super minimal environment. I’m sure you can think of a number of different other use cases as well. Honestly, unikernels replacing all the crap firmware in the world would be a huge win. ## Open Compute Summit Open Compute Summit Just this past week I spent a day at the Open Compute Summit. What is happening there in the open firmware space is truly awesome. They had demos of hardware they are booting with LinuxBoot and Coreboot. Facebook runs this on their infrastructure as well as with OpenBMC to replace the traditional, proprietary BMC firmware. Trammel Hudson has somegreat postson LinuxBoot, which include links to some really great talks by him and Ron Minnich. Just this past week I spent a day at the Open Compute Summit. What is happening there in the open firmware space is truly awesome. They had demos of hardware they are booting with LinuxBoot and Coreboot. Facebook runs this on their infrastructure as well as with OpenBMC to replace the traditional, proprietary BMC firmware. Trammel Hudson has some [great posts](https://trmm.net/LinuxBoot_34c3) great posts on LinuxBoot, which include links to some really great talks by him and Ron Minnich. 😍 the open systems firmware community is awesomepic.twitter.com/DAqudm6M4Z— jessie frazelle 👩🏼‍🚀 (@jessfraz)March 14, 2019 > 😍 the open systems firmware community is awesomepic.twitter.com/DAqudm6M4Z— jessie frazelle 👩🏼‍🚀 (@jessfraz)March 14, 2019 😍 the open systems firmware community is awesomepic.twitter.com/DAqudm6M4Z 😍 the open systems firmware community is awesome [pic.twitter.com/DAqudm6M4Z](https://t.co/DAqudm6M4Z) pic.twitter.com/DAqudm6M4Z — jessie frazelle 👩🏼‍🚀 (@jessfraz) [March 14, 2019](https://twitter.com/jessfraz/status/1106301027408465920?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw) March 14, 2019 Facebook’s server racks are gorgeous. They have a power bus which runs down the center and everything gets power from that, with the main power coming out of the power unit towards the middle of the rack (in the first picture below). Facebook’s server racks are gorgeous. They have a power bus which runs down the center and everything gets power from that, with the main power coming out of the power unit towards the middle of the rack (in the first picture below). The Facebook rack and node designs are seriously gorgeous, simple. The power barchef kisspic.twitter.com/pGphy9uLLl— jessie frazelle 👩🏼‍🚀 (@jessfraz)March 14, 2019 > The Facebook rack and node designs are seriously gorgeous, simple. The power barchef kisspic.twitter.com/pGphy9uLLl— jessie frazelle 👩🏼‍🚀 (@jessfraz)March 14, 2019 The Facebook rack and node designs are seriously gorgeous, simple. The power barchef kisspic.twitter.com/pGphy9uLLl The Facebook rack and node designs are seriously gorgeous, simple. The power bar *chef kiss* chef kiss [pic.twitter.com/pGphy9uLLl](https://t.co/pGphy9uLLl) pic.twitter.com/pGphy9uLLl — jessie frazelle 👩🏼‍🚀 (@jessfraz) [March 14, 2019](https://twitter.com/jessfraz/status/1106336080956018689?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw) March 14, 2019 ### Boot Guard Boot Guard One thing I learned that I found fascinating was about Boot Guard for Intel processors and the equivalents on ARM and AMD. Boot Guard is supposed to verify the firmware signatures for the processor. The problem with this, in Intel’s case, is only Intel has the keys for signing firmware packages. This makes it impossible for you to then use Coreboot and LinuxBoot or equivalents as firmware on those processors. If you tried, the firmware would not be signed with Intel’s key and would brick the board. Matthew Garrett wrotea great postabout this as well. One thing I learned that I found fascinating was about Boot Guard for Intel processors and the equivalents on ARM and AMD. Boot Guard is supposed to verify the firmware signatures for the processor. The problem with this, in Intel’s case, is only Intel has the keys for signing firmware packages. This makes it impossible for you to then use Coreboot and LinuxBoot or equivalents as firmware on those processors. If you tried, the firmware would not be signed with Intel’s key and would brick the board. Matthew Garrett wrote [a great post](https://mjg59.dreamwidth.org/33981.html) a great post about this as well. If a person owns the hardware, they have a right to own the firmware as well. Boot Guard prevents this. Inanother great talkby Trammel, he found a vulnerability tobypass BootGuard. If a person owns the hardware, they have a right to own the firmware as well. Boot Guard prevents this. In [another great talk](https://trmm.net/OSFC_2018_Security_keynote#Boot_Guard) another great talk by Trammel, he found a vulnerability to [bypass BootGuard](https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2018-12169) bypass BootGuard . CVE-2018-12169 also potentially allows a developer to "jailbreak" their BootGuard protected laptop since the UEFI DXE volume can be replaced with a user provided LinuxBoot ROM image.https://t.co/yHwwMOTyx7pic.twitter.com/MeWI0DGUBf— Trammell Hudson ⚙ (@qrs)September 24, 2018 > CVE-2018-12169 also potentially allows a developer to "jailbreak" their BootGuard protected laptop since the UEFI DXE volume can be replaced with a user provided LinuxBoot ROM image.https://t.co/yHwwMOTyx7pic.twitter.com/MeWI0DGUBf— Trammell Hudson ⚙ (@qrs)September 24, 2018 CVE-2018-12169 also potentially allows a developer to "jailbreak" their BootGuard protected laptop since the UEFI DXE volume can be replaced with a user provided LinuxBoot ROM image.https://t.co/yHwwMOTyx7pic.twitter.com/MeWI0DGUBf CVE-2018-12169 also potentially allows a developer to "jailbreak" their BootGuard protected laptop since the UEFI DXE volume can be replaced with a user provided LinuxBoot ROM image. [https://t.co/yHwwMOTyx7](https://t.co/yHwwMOTyx7) https://t.co/yHwwMOTyx7 [pic.twitter.com/MeWI0DGUBf](https://t.co/MeWI0DGUBf) pic.twitter.com/MeWI0DGUBf — Trammell Hudson ⚙ (@qrs) [September 24, 2018](https://twitter.com/qrs/status/1044157473882591233?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw) September 24, 2018 This “feature” from hardware vendors is preventing the innovation of this community and preventing pushing technology to a safer place. If you are in a position to push back on these hardware vendors, please do so. They need all the help they can get. This “feature” from hardware vendors is preventing the innovation of this community and preventing pushing technology to a safer place. If you are in a position to push back on these hardware vendors, please do so. They need all the help they can get. ### Server rack encased in liquid Server rack encased in liquid Lastly, I saw something bat shit crazy at Open Compute Summit. It was something I saw in the Expo Hall. One vendor has encased an entire server rack in liquid for liquid cooling. I’m not sure I could sleep at night using this. The funniest part about this though was the demo at their booth still had fans in the rack! I mean… why would you need fans if you had liquid cooling… they claimed it was just “left over” and you wouldn’t need that. But at a conference where everyone is showing off their custom hardware, you’d think they would have left the fans at home ;). Lastly, I saw something bat shit crazy at Open Compute Summit. It was something I saw in the Expo Hall. One vendor has encased an entire server rack in liquid for liquid cooling. I’m not sure I could sleep at night using this. The funniest part about this though was the demo at their booth still had fans in the rack! I mean… why would you need fans if you had liquid cooling… they claimed it was just “left over” and you wouldn’t need that. But at a conference where everyone is showing off their custom hardware, you’d think they would have left the fans at home ;). That’s the end of this update of my adventures. Hope you all enjoyed it. I know I enjoyed living it! That’s the end of this update of my adventures. Hope you all enjoyed it. I know I enjoyed living it!
