---
title: "News"
date: 2003-06-02
url: https://www.joelonsoftware.com/2003/06/02/news/
word_count: 590
---


[VMWare](http://www.vmware.com/products/desktop/ws_features.html)  version 4.0 is out. You’ve already heard my [raves](https://www.joelonsoftware.com/news/fog0000000103.html) [about](https://www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/fog0000000306.html) this brilliant  program in the past; I simply couldn’t live without it.


The new version adds the ability to store snapshots of the  virtual computer’s complete state, including RAM and all hard drives, and  instantly jump back to the snapshot whenever you want. Now, instead of having a  blank Win 98 machine ready to boot up at any time, I have a blank Win 98  machine that is *already booted and logged on,* ready to restore at any  time. This actually saves a significant amount of time while doing configuration  testing.


I have one complaint about the new version: for some reason, there’s a new  CMOS, whatever that means, which meant that when my old VMs woke up, they had to  rediscover all their hardware from scratch. This was a *major* nuisance  with Windows 98, resulting in a flurry of Plug ‘n’ Play hell. I gave up,  throwing away my Win 98 OSes and recreating them from scratch, a serious  annoyance (especially since I have VMs running in languages which I don’t  understand, so I can’t really tell what they’re yelling at me about.) The  Windows 2000 and Windows XP VMs seemed to handle all the Plug ‘n’ Play  rediscovery transparently.


Last Friday afternoon, you may have noticed that this site was down for 10  minutes or so while we rebooted the server a few dozen times to apply the latest  Microsoft patches, flash the bios, reseat some memory, etc. It occurred to me:  what if, instead of running a conventional server, you ran your server in a VM?  So everything my server does would actually be running in a virtual machine on  the server. That has five interesting implications:

1. I could make a snapshot of the complete machine state. If anyone hacks  into the machine, installing trapdoors or defacing the website, a single click  gets us back to a known-good condition. The catch: you can’t keep any  frequently-changing state on the server. Easy fix: run *another* VM as  a file server for your frequently-changing state (like web log files,  mailboxes, etc.).
2. You can split up functions among different VMs without buying more  hardware. Isolate your mail server from your web server from your DNS server,  all on one machine.
3. When I need to install an OS patch or even an entirely new operating  system, rather than rebooting, I would simply apply the patch to a new,  identical copy of the virtual machine running on my desktop computer. I could  copy the new VM up to the server, stop the old VM and start the new VM at the  same time. Net effect: you can replace the whole operating system on a live  server with only seconds of down time, zero risk that the new OS won’t come  up, and only one physical box.
4. If anything goes wrong and you need to swap in different hardware, all you  need is some kind of box that will run VMWare. Solutions like Ghost won’t  quite work because the ghosted image may not have the right device drivers for  the replacement hardware.
5. Everything runs emulated, so you’re paying for all this convenience with a  lot of CPU cycles.


Anyway, VMWare has a server product, about which I know very little, but it  probably lets you do all this and more and I think it’s going to be an  increasingly standard policy of good system administrators to build servers as  VMs for all but the most CPU-intensive applications.
