---
title: "16"
date: 2003-07-16
url: https://www.joelonsoftware.com/2003/07/16/16-2/
word_count: 282
---


The city of Munich is [replacing](http://www.usatoday.com/usatonline/20030714/5320229s.htm) Windows with Linux on 14,000 desktop computers. For a secretary who has to do email and type simple documents, that will probably be fine.


Here’s my question. What about all the people who need to run software that doesn’t run on Linux? The article said Munich uses 175 custom Windows applications, all of which would need to be ported. And what about major commercial applications for which there’s no equivalent? I guarantee you that somewhere out of those 14,000 desktops there’s someone using Quark to publish an important report. Even if there were an equivalent for Linux, which there isn’t, it wouldn’t be the format that the printers are used to receiving. There are probably a lot of people with custom Access databases. How do they access their data?


I suspect what will really happen is that they’ll roll out Linux everywhere, and then every mid-level bureaucrat will realize they can’t do their job because some application they need just doesn’t run on Linux, and they’ll buy Windows XP at full retail price, burying the costs in expense reports or petty cash or somewhere else. And eventually Munich will buy so much Microsoft software at retail price, without the benefit of a negotiated discount, that Microsoft will make *more* money and Munich will start to realize that they’re paying *twice* for software: once for the politically correct shelfware ($2550 per desktop for *Linux*, so it sort of sounds unbelievable) and once for the software they need to get their jobs done.


Either that or they’ll simply be unable to do their jobs, and, like bureaucrats everywhere, they won’t tell anyone, while the municipality quietly falls apart.
