---
title: "15"
date: 2003-06-15
url: https://www.joelonsoftware.com/2003/06/15/15/
word_count: 486
---


Construction has finally begun on the new Fog Creek  office. Remember how I said you should start looking for an office nine  months before you need it? Make that ten.

**Beware National News  Magazines Claiming Cycles Are Permanent** Fortune [writes](http://www.fortune.com/fortune/careers/articles/0,15114,457284,00.html), “Professionals  have never had a tougher time finding a job. It’s not just the economy; the  rules of the game are changing.” This is, quite frankly, no different than four  years ago during the “New Economy” bullshit when they were blabbing about a new,  permanently high level for stock prices as if there would never be business  cycles again. It’s just bullshit. The economy is cyclical and has been for  hundreds of years. In fact the sure sign that things are about to change is when  the conventional wisdom becomes, “things will never change.” **Cover  Letters** Here’s some advice for people writing cover letters. Don’t take any of the  standard career-services-office advice for writing cover letters, or your cover  letter will look exactly like everyone else’s cover letter. If you write one of  those “I work great on teams but am also a strong independent worker” cover  letters, your cover letter will look just like everyone else’s, and you won’t  stand out. The way to stand out is to write a letter that reflects your unique  personality and highlights the reasons why you want to work at the place to  which you are applying. 95% of the cover letters I receive do not include  anything about Fog Creek and show no sign that they have been customized in any  way for the job in question. This sends a signal that you are simply spamming  your resume to hundreds of jobs, which, in turn, sends a signal that you are  both desperate and not willing to work very hard. Here’s the thing: the very best candidates have come to realize that they  have a choice of where to work, and when they apply for a job, they are applying  because there’s something intriguing about that particular job, not because  they’ll take any work that comes along. And you can see it in their cover  letters. For example, if I were to see something like “I’m happy where I  am, but I’ve always wanted to move to New York and if Fog Creek is anything like  you describe it on your website, it sounds like a great place” you would sound a  lot more desirable than someone who writes, “You will find that I am a very hard  worker.” If you make your cover letter *interesting*, make it personal,  and drop hints that you have choices in the world, you will sound more like one  of the top 1% candidates. By the way, we received something like eighty applications for our  opening. Probably 50% of those people were qualified and at least ten of them  were great. I won’t say more because we’re still in the interviewing  stage.
