---
title: "News"
date: 2004-10-20
url: https://www.joelonsoftware.com/2004/10/20/news-30/
word_count: 290
---


Hoo boy, almost let an entire month go by without posting!


I’m editing a new book: a collection of the best software essays published anywhere — on the web or in print — during 2004. Please nominate essays by posting a new topic [here](http://discuss.joelonsoftware.com/default.asp?best04). Please include the title, the author’s name, and a URL where the essay can be found. If you’ve read one of the essays mentioned and want to comment on whether it belongs in the book, please reply to the topic nominating it with your comments. Full names and email addresses are required to nominate or comment. Writers are encouraged to nominate their own works… don’t be embarassed! The deadline for nominations is November 20th. The best articles will be published in a book by Apress (assuming we can secure the rights).


**In other news…**


The whole company (and four outside consultants, phew) has been concentrating on trying to get FogBugz 4.0 out the door. Exciting stuff there: this release, I think, will really show the benefits of our policy of listening to our customers, not our competitors. If all goes well we’ll be pushing out the first beta in a couple of weeks.


The goofy name FogBugz is an historical accident which I rather regret, but the brand name is so well known by now that we’re not going to change it. We have subtly reduced the number of capital letters (FogBUGZ became FogBugz) which makes it a little bit less embarassing, but I think for now we’re stuck with the stupid name. I have actually gotten email from people who say they can’t buy FogBugz because the name doesn’t sound “professional.” Sorry! Get over it, or you may have to use the professionally-named “Bugzilla” forever!
