---
title: "Whining pays off?"
date: 2004-06-20
url: https://bcantrill.dtrace.org/2004/06/20/whining-pays-off/
slug: whining-pays-off
word_count: 317
---

# Whining pays off? Whining pays off? Jun 20, 2004 It normally doesn’t – and it probably shouldn’t. But Chris Preimesberger, the author ofthe story on Solaris 10thatI mentioned on Friday, has apparently read (and commented on) my blog entry – and he corrected the story! The details of the paragraph are now correct, and I’m certainly happier. It normally doesn’t – and it probably shouldn’t. But Chris Preimesberger, the author of [the story on Solaris 10](http://servers.itmanagersjournal.com/servers/04/06/17/2019258.shtml) the story on Solaris 10 that [I mentioned on Friday](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/bmc/20040618#be_careful_what_you_ask) I mentioned on Friday , has apparently read (and commented on) my blog entry – and he corrected the story! The details of the paragraph are now correct, and I’m certainly happier. This whole episode has given me insight into the unique tribulations of being a technical reporter. It must take a thick skin to be dealing with people like me all of the time: fast talkers who bombard with technical detail, and then expect absolute accuracy in whatever stories emerge. Of course, from my perspective, the problem is that the readership assumes absolute accuracy – and if the technical details are incorrect, they will naturally blame the technology (or worse, the technologist) instead of questioning the accuracy of the reportage. This whole episode has given me insight into the unique tribulations of being a technical reporter. It must take a thick skin to be dealing with people like me all of the time: fast talkers who bombard with technical detail, and then expect absolute accuracy in whatever stories emerge. Of course, from my perspective, the problem is that the readership assumes absolute accuracy – and if the technical details are incorrect, they will naturally blame the technology (or worse, the technologist) instead of questioning the accuracy of the reportage. Anyway, Chris: thanks for correcting the story; it’s much appreciated. Anyway, Chris: thanks for correcting the story; it’s much appreciated.
