---
title: "IΟΔ¬Ä¬ôll take a ΟΔ¬Ä¬€yΟΔ¬Ä¬ù, Pat..."
date: 2004-06-16
url: https://bcantrill.dtrace.org/2004/06/16/ill-take-a-y-pat.../
slug: ill-take-a-y-pat...
word_count: 492
---

# IΟΔ¬Ä¬ôll take a ΟΔ¬Ä¬€yΟΔ¬Ä¬ù, Pat... IΟΔ¬Ä¬ôll take a ΟΔ¬Ä¬€yΟΔ¬Ä¬ù, Pat... Jun 16, 2004 Thanks to those of you who joined us for theExpert Exchangethis morning. Adam and I were typing furiously trying to keep up with all of your questions! In fact, we were typingsofuriously that about a third of the way into the session, the βÄ€yβÄù key on my laptop stopped working. No capital Y, no lower-case y, no yβÄôs whatsoever! Panicky, I tried about four sentences with a y in the X cutbuffer (pasting when I needed a y), but I discovered that βÄ™ like many of the letters that you wouldnβÄôt pick first onWheel of FortuneβÄ™ yβÄôs frequency is still sufficiently high to make living without it nearly impossible. (Three yβÄôs in that last clause alone!) So I took out my car keys, pried off my βÄ€yβÄù key, took off the hard plastic mechanism underneath it, and discovered that I could still get a y if I prodded the soft plastic underbelly of what used to be my βÄ€yβÄù key. I picked up midsentence of the answer I was working on, and (fortunately) I made it through the rest of the chat without losing any other lettersβÄΠ Thanks to those of you who joined us for the [Expert Exchange](http://see.sun.com/Apps/DCS/mcp?q=ST1EW99TFb8i2LZ) Expert Exchange this morning. Adam and I were typing furiously trying to keep up with all of your questions! In fact, we were typing *so* so furiously that about a third of the way into the session, the βÄ€yβÄù key on my laptop stopped working. No capital Y, no lower-case y, no yβÄôs whatsoever! Panicky, I tried about four sentences with a y in the X cutbuffer (pasting when I needed a y), but I discovered that βÄ™ like many of the letters that you wouldnβÄôt pick first on [Wheel of Fortune](http://www.wheeloffortune.com/) Wheel of Fortune βÄ™ yβÄôs frequency is still sufficiently high to make living without it nearly impossible. (Three yβÄôs in that last clause alone!) So I took out my car keys, pried off my βÄ€yβÄù key, took off the hard plastic mechanism underneath it, and discovered that I could still get a y if I prodded the soft plastic underbelly of what used to be my βÄ€yβÄù key. I picked up midsentence of the answer I was working on, and (fortunately) I made it through the rest of the chat without losing any other lettersβÄΠ Anyway, hopefully you got a chance to ask that nagging question you had on DTrace. If you didnβÄôt, donβÄôt worry βÄ™ just head over to theDTrace forumand post it over there. Having said that, it looks like someone just did; off to the forumβÄΠ Anyway, hopefully you got a chance to ask that nagging question you had on DTrace. If you didnβÄôt, donβÄôt worry βÄ™ just head over to the [DTrace forum](http://forum.sun.com/forum.jsp?forum=211) DTrace forum and post it over there. Having said that, it looks like someone just did; off to the forumβÄΠ
