---
title: "DTrace and Ruby"
date: 2005-08-21
url: https://bcantrill.dtrace.org/2005/08/21/dtrace-and-ruby/
slug: dtrace-and-ruby
word_count: 3076
---

# DTrace and Ruby DTrace and Ruby Aug 21, 2005 It’s been an exciting few weeks forDTrace. The party got started withWez Furlong’snewPHP DTrace providerat OSCON. ThenDevon O’Dellannounced that he was starting to work in earnest on aDTrace port to FreeBSD. And now,Rich Lowehas made available a prototypeRuby DTrace provider. To install this, grabRuby 1.8.2, applyRich’s patch, and run./configurewith the--enable-dtraceoption. When you run the resultingruby, you’ll see two probes:function-entryandfunction-return. The arguments to these probes are as follows: It’s been an exciting few weeks for [DTrace](http://opensolaris.org/os/community/dtrace/) DTrace . The party got started with [Wez Furlong’s](http://netevil.org/) Wez Furlong’s new [PHP DTrace provider](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/bmc?entry=dtrace_and_php_demonstrated) PHP DTrace provider at OSCON. Then [Devon O’Dell](http://www.sitetronics.com/wordpress/) Devon O’Dell announced that he was starting to work in earnest on a [DTrace port to FreeBSD](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/bmc?entry=dtrace_on_freebsd) DTrace port to FreeBSD . And now, [Rich Lowe](mailto:richlowe@richlowe.net) Rich Lowe has made available a prototype [Ruby DTrace provider](http://richlowe.net/~richlowe/patches/ruby-1.8.2-dtrace.diff) Ruby DTrace provider . To install this, grab [Ruby 1.8.2](ftp://ftp.ruby-lang.org/pub/ruby/ruby-1.8.2.tar.gz) Ruby 1.8.2 , apply [Rich’s patch](http://richlowe.net/~richlowe/patches/ruby-1.8.2-dtrace.diff) Rich’s patch , and run `./configure` ./configure with the `--enable-dtrace` --enable-dtrace option. When you run the resulting `ruby` ruby , you’ll see two probes: `function-entry` function-entry and `function-return` function-return . The arguments to these probes are as follows: * arg0is the name of the class (a pointer to a string within Ruby) arg0is the name of the class (a pointer to a string within Ruby) `arg0` arg0 is the name of the class (a pointer to a string within Ruby) * arg1is the name of the method (also a pointer to a string within Ruby) arg1is the name of the method (also a pointer to a string within Ruby) `arg1` arg1 is the name of the method (also a pointer to a string within Ruby) * arg2is the name of the file containing the call site (again, a pointer to a string within Ruby) arg2is the name of the file containing the call site (again, a pointer to a string within Ruby) `arg2` arg2 is the name of the file containing the call site (again, a pointer to a string within Ruby) * arg3is the line number of the call site. arg3is the line number of the call site. `arg3` arg3 is the line number of the call site. So if, for example, you’d like to know the classes and methods that are called in a particular Ruby script, you could do it with this simple D script: So if, for example, you’d like to know the classes and methods that are called in a particular Ruby script, you could do it with this simple D script: ``` #pragma D option quiet ruby$target:::function-entry { @[copyinstr(arg0), copyinstr(arg1)] = count(); } END { printf("%15s %30s %s\n", "CLASS", "METHOD", "COUNT"); printa("%15s %30s %@d\n", @); } ``` #pragma D option quiet ruby$target:::function-entry { @[copyinstr(arg0), copyinstr(arg1)] = count(); } END { printf("%15s %30s %s\n", "CLASS", "METHOD", "COUNT"); printa("%15s %30s %@d\n", @); } To run this against thecal.rbthat ships in thesampledirectory of Ruby, call the above scriptwhatmethods.dand run it this way: To run this against the `cal.rb` cal.rb that ships in the `sample` sample directory of Ruby, call the above script `whatmethods.d` whatmethods.d and run it this way: ``` # dtrace -s ./whatmethods.d -c "../ruby ./cal.rb" August 2005 S M Tu W Th F S 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 CLASS METHOD COUNT Array <= 2 Hash each 2 Hash keys 2 Module attr 2 Module method_undefined 2 Module public 2 Rational coerce 2 Array + 3 Class civil_to_jd 3 Hash [] 3 Object collect 3 Array collect 4 Class inherited 4 Range each 4 String size 4 Module private_class_method 5 Object eval 5 Object require 5 String gsub 5 Class jd_to_wday 7 Class once 7 Date __8713__ 7 Date wday 7 Fixnum % 8 Array join 10 Hash []= 10 String + 10 Array each 11 NilClass to_s 11 Module alias_method 22 Module private 22 Symbol to_s 26 Module module_eval 28 Date mday 31 Object send 31 Date mon 42 Date __11105__ 43 Class jd_to_civil 45 Date succ 47 Class os? 48 Date + 49 Fixnum <= 49 String rjust 49 Class ajd_to_jd 50 Class clfloor 50 Date __10417__ 50 Integer to_i 50 Object Integer 50 Rational divmod 50 Rational to_i 50 Date 51 Date ajd 51 Date jd 51 Rational 51 Class new0 52 Date initialize 52 Integer to_r 52 Object singleton_method_added 67 Date civil 75 Symbol to_i 91 Float * 96 Float coerce 96 Fixnum / 97 Object frozen? 100 Rational - 104 Fixnum to_s 123 Array [] 141 Object class 150 Module method_added 154 Float / 186 Module === 200 Rational / 204 Rational + 248 Float floor 282 Fixnum << 306 Class reduce 356 Integer gcd 356 Object Rational 356 Fixnum + 414 Class new! 610 Rational initialize 610 Class new 612 Fixnum abs 712 Fixnum div 762 Fixnum * 1046 Fixnum 1970 Fixnum - 2398 Object kind_of? 2439 Fixnum >> 4698 Fixnum [] 7689 Fixnum == 11436 ``` # dtrace -s ./whatmethods.d -c "../ruby ./cal.rb" August 2005 S M Tu W Th F S 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 CLASS METHOD COUNT Array <= 2 Hash each 2 Hash keys 2 Module attr 2 Module method_undefined 2 Module public 2 Rational coerce 2 Array + 3 Class civil_to_jd 3 Hash [] 3 Object collect 3 Array collect 4 Class inherited 4 Range each 4 String size 4 Module private_class_method 5 Object eval 5 Object require 5 String gsub 5 Class jd_to_wday 7 Class once 7 Date __8713__ 7 Date wday 7 Fixnum % 8 Array join 10 Hash []= 10 String + 10 Array each 11 NilClass to_s 11 Module alias_method 22 Module private 22 Symbol to_s 26 Module module_eval 28 Date mday 31 Object send 31 Date mon 42 Date __11105__ 43 Class jd_to_civil 45 Date succ 47 Class os? 48 Date + 49 Fixnum <= 49 String rjust 49 Class ajd_to_jd 50 Class clfloor 50 Date __10417__ 50 Integer to_i 50 Object Integer 50 Rational divmod 50 Rational to_i 50 Date 51 Date ajd 51 Date jd 51 Rational 51 Class new0 52 Date initialize 52 Integer to_r 52 Object singleton_method_added 67 Date civil 75 Symbol to_i 91 Float * 96 Float coerce 96 Fixnum / 97 Object frozen? 100 Rational - 104 Fixnum to_s 123 Array [] 141 Object class 150 Module method_added 154 Float / 186 Module === 200 Rational / 204 Rational + 248 Float floor 282 Fixnum << 306 Class reduce 356 Integer gcd 356 Object Rational 356 Fixnum + 414 Class new! 610 Rational initialize 610 Class new 612 Fixnum abs 712 Fixnum div 762 Fixnum * 1046 Fixnum 1970 Fixnum - 2398 Object kind_of? 2439 Fixnum >> 4698 Fixnum [] 7689 Fixnum == 11436 This may leave us with many questions. For example, there are a couple of calls to construct new objects – where are they coming from? To answer that question: This may leave us with many questions. For example, there are a couple of calls to construct new objects – where are they coming from? To answer that question: ``` #pragma D option quiet ruby$target:::function-entry /copyinstr(arg1) == "initialize"/ { @[copyinstr(arg0), copyinstr(arg2), arg3] = count(); } END { printf("%-10s %-40s %-10s %s\n", "CLASS", "INITIALIZED IN FILE", "AT LINE", "COUNT"); printa("%-10s %-40s %-10d %@d\n", @); } ``` #pragma D option quiet ruby$target:::function-entry /copyinstr(arg1) == "initialize"/ { @[copyinstr(arg0), copyinstr(arg2), arg3] = count(); } END { printf("%-10s %-40s %-10s %s\n", "CLASS", "INITIALIZED IN FILE", "AT LINE", "COUNT"); printa("%-10s %-40s %-10d %@d\n", @); } Calling the abovewhereinit.d, we can run it in a similar manner: Calling the above `whereinit.d` whereinit.d , we can run it in a similar manner: ``` # dtrace -s ./whereinit.d -c "../ruby ./cal.rb" August 2005 S M Tu W Th F S 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 CLASS INITIALIZED IN FILE AT LINE COUNT Cal ./cal.rb 144 1 Date /usr/local/lib/ruby/1.8/date.rb 593 1 Date /usr/local/lib/ruby/1.8/date.rb 703 1 Date /usr/local/lib/ruby/1.8/date.rb 916 1 Time /usr/local/lib/ruby/1.8/date.rb 702 1 Date /usr/local/lib/ruby/1.8/date.rb 901 49 Rational /usr/local/lib/ruby/1.8/rational.rb 374 610 ``` # dtrace -s ./whereinit.d -c "../ruby ./cal.rb" August 2005 S M Tu W Th F S 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 CLASS INITIALIZED IN FILE AT LINE COUNT Cal ./cal.rb 144 1 Date /usr/local/lib/ruby/1.8/date.rb 593 1 Date /usr/local/lib/ruby/1.8/date.rb 703 1 Date /usr/local/lib/ruby/1.8/date.rb 916 1 Time /usr/local/lib/ruby/1.8/date.rb 702 1 Date /usr/local/lib/ruby/1.8/date.rb 901 49 Rational /usr/local/lib/ruby/1.8/rational.rb 374 610 Looking at theDateclass, it’s interesting to look at line 901 of file/usr/local/lib/ruby/1.8/date.rb: Looking at the `Date` Date class, it’s interesting to look at line 901 of file `/usr/local/lib/ruby/1.8/date.rb` /usr/local/lib/ruby/1.8/date.rb : ``` 897 # If +n+ is not a Numeric, a TypeError will be thrown. In 898 # particular, two Dates cannot be added to each other. 899 def + (n) 900 case n 901 when Numeric; return self.class.new0(@ajd + n, @of, @sg) 902 end 903 raise TypeError, 'expected numeric' 904 end ``` 897 # If +n+ is not a Numeric, a TypeError will be thrown. In 898 # particular, two Dates cannot be added to each other. 899 def + (n) 900 case n 901 when Numeric; return self.class.new0(@ajd + n, @of, @sg) 902 end 903 raise TypeError, 'expected numeric' 904 end This makes sense: we’re initializing newDateinstances in the+method forDate. And where arethosecoming from? It’s not hard to build a script that will tell us the file and line for the call site of an arbitrary class and method: This makes sense: we’re initializing new `Date` Date instances in the `+` + method for `Date` Date . And where are *those* those coming from? It’s not hard to build a script that will tell us the file and line for the call site of an arbitrary class and method: ``` #pragma D option quiet ruby$target:::function-entry /copyinstr(arg0) == $$1 && copyinstr(arg1) == $$2/ { @[copyinstr(arg2), arg3] = count(); } END { printf("%-40s %-10s %s\n", "FILE", "LINE", "COUNT"); printa("%-40s %-10d %@d\n", @); } ``` #pragma D option quiet ruby$target:::function-entry /copyinstr(arg0) == $$1 && copyinstr(arg1) == $$2/ { @[copyinstr(arg2), arg3] = count(); } END { printf("%-40s %-10s %s\n", "FILE", "LINE", "COUNT"); printa("%-40s %-10d %@d\n", @); } For this particular example (Date#+()), call the abovewherecall.dand run it this way: For this particular example ( `Date#+()` Date#+() ), call the above `wherecall.d` wherecall.d and run it this way: ``` # dtrace -s ./wherecall.d "Date" "+" -c "../ruby ./cal.rb" August 2005 S M Tu W Th F S 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 FILE LINE COUNT ./cal.rb 102 2 ./cal.rb 60 6 ./cal.rb 63 41 ``` # dtrace -s ./wherecall.d "Date" "+" -c "../ruby ./cal.rb" August 2005 S M Tu W Th F S 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 FILE LINE COUNT ./cal.rb 102 2 ./cal.rb 60 6 ./cal.rb 63 41 And looking at the indicated lines in cal.rb: And looking at the indicated lines in cal.rb: ``` 55 def pict(y, m) 56 d = (1..31).detect{|d| Date.valid_date?(y, m, d, @start)} 57 fi = Date.new(y, m, d, @start) 58 fi -= (fi.jd - @k + 1) % 7 59 60 ve = (fi..fi + 6).collect{|cu| 61 %w(S M Tu W Th F S)[cu.wday] 62 } 63 ve += (fi..fi + 41).collect{|cu| 64 if cu.mon == m then cu.send(@da) end.to_s 65 } 66 ``` 55 def pict(y, m) 56 d = (1..31).detect{|d| Date.valid_date?(y, m, d, @start)} 57 fi = Date.new(y, m, d, @start) 58 fi -= (fi.jd - @k + 1) % 7 59 60 ve = (fi..fi + 6).collect{|cu| 61 %w(S M Tu W Th F S)[cu.wday] 62 } 63 ve += (fi..fi + 41).collect{|cu| 64 if cu.mon == m then cu.send(@da) end.to_s 65 } 66 So this is doing exactly what we would expect, given the code. Now, if we were interested in making this perform a little better, we might be interested to know the work that is being induced byDate#+(). Here’s a script that reports the classes and methods called by a given class/method – and its callees: So this is doing exactly what we would expect, given the code. Now, if we were interested in making this perform a little better, we might be interested to know the work that is being induced by `Date#+()` Date#+() . Here’s a script that reports the classes and methods called by a given class/method – and its callees: ``` #pragma D option quiet ruby$target:::function-entry /copyinstr(arg0) == $$1 && copyinstr(arg1) == $$2/ { self->date = 1; } ruby$target:::function-entry /self->date/ { @[strjoin(strjoin(copyinstr(arg0), "#"), copyinstr(arg1))] = count(); } ruby$target:::function-return /copyinstr(arg0) == $$1 && copyinstr(arg1) == $$2/ { self->date = 0; ndates++; } END { normalize(@, ndates); printf("Each call to %s#%s() induced:\n\n", $$1, $$2); printa("%@8d call(s) to %s()\n", @); } ``` #pragma D option quiet ruby$target:::function-entry /copyinstr(arg0) == $$1 && copyinstr(arg1) == $$2/ { self->date = 1; } ruby$target:::function-entry /self->date/ { @[strjoin(strjoin(copyinstr(arg0), "#"), copyinstr(arg1))] = count(); } ruby$target:::function-return /copyinstr(arg0) == $$1 && copyinstr(arg1) == $$2/ { self->date = 0; ndates++; } END { normalize(@, ndates); printf("Each call to %s#%s() induced:\n\n", $$1, $$2); printa("%@8d call(s) to %s()\n", @); } Calling the abovewhatcalls.d, we can answer the question aboutDate#+()this way: Calling the above `whatcalls.d` whatcalls.d , we can answer the question about `Date#+()` Date#+() this way: ``` # dtrace -s ./whatcalls.d "Date" "+" -c "../ruby ./cal.rb" August 2005 S M Tu W Th F S 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 Each call to Date#+() induced: 1 call(s) to Class#new0() 1 call(s) to Class#reduce() 1 call(s) to Date#+() 1 call(s) to Date#initialize() 1 call(s) to Fixnum#+() 1 call(s) to Fixnum#<<() 1 call(s) to Integer#gcd() 1 call(s) to Module#===() 1 call(s) to Object#Rational() 1 call(s) to Object#class() 2 call(s) to Class#new() 2 call(s) to Class#new!() 2 call(s) to Fixnum#abs() 2 call(s) to Fixnum#div() 2 call(s) to Rational#+() 2 call(s) to Rational#initialize() 3 call(s) to Fixnum#*() 3 call(s) to Fixnum#() 23 call(s) to Fixnum#>>() 37 call(s) to Fixnum#[]() 52 call(s) to Fixnum#==() ``` # dtrace -s ./whatcalls.d "Date" "+" -c "../ruby ./cal.rb" August 2005 S M Tu W Th F S 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 Each call to Date#+() induced: 1 call(s) to Class#new0() 1 call(s) to Class#reduce() 1 call(s) to Date#+() 1 call(s) to Date#initialize() 1 call(s) to Fixnum#+() 1 call(s) to Fixnum#<<() 1 call(s) to Integer#gcd() 1 call(s) to Module#===() 1 call(s) to Object#Rational() 1 call(s) to Object#class() 2 call(s) to Class#new() 2 call(s) to Class#new!() 2 call(s) to Fixnum#abs() 2 call(s) to Fixnum#div() 2 call(s) to Rational#+() 2 call(s) to Rational#initialize() 3 call(s) to Fixnum#*() 3 call(s) to Fixnum#() 23 call(s) to Fixnum#>>() 37 call(s) to Fixnum#[]() 52 call(s) to Fixnum#==() That’s a lot of work for something that should be pretty simple! Indeed, it’s counterintuitive that, say,Integer#gcd()would be called fromDate#+()– and it certainly seems suboptimal. I’ll leave further exploration into this as an exercise to the reader, but suffice it to say that this has to do with the use of a rational number in theDateclass – the elimination of which would elminate most of the above calls and presumably greatly improve the performance ofDate#+(). That’s a lot of work for something that should be pretty simple! Indeed, it’s counterintuitive that, say, `Integer#gcd()` Integer#gcd() would be called from `Date#+()` Date#+() – and it certainly seems suboptimal. I’ll leave further exploration into this as an exercise to the reader, but suffice it to say that this has to do with the use of a rational number in the `Date` Date class – the elimination of which would elminate most of the above calls and presumably greatly improve the performance of `Date#+()` Date#+() . Now, Ruby aficionados may note that some of the above functionality has been available in Ruby by setting theset_trace_funcfunction (upon which theRuby profileris implemented). While that’s true (to a point – theset_trace_funcseems to be a pretty limited mechanism), the Ruby DTrace provider is nonetheless a great lurch forward for Ruby developers: it allows developers to use DTrace-specific constructs like aggregations and thread-local variables to hone in on a problem; it allows Ruby-related work performed lower in the stack (e.g., in the I/O subsystem, CPU dispatcher or network stack) to be connected to the Ruby code inducing it; it allows a running Ruby script to be instrumented (and reinstrumented) without stopping or restarting it; and it allows multiple, disjoint Ruby scripts to be coherently observed and understood as a single entity. More succinctly, it’s just damned cool. So thanks to Rich for developing the prototype provider – and if you’re a Ruby developer, enjoy! Now, Ruby aficionados may note that some of the above functionality has been available in Ruby by setting the `set_trace_func` set_trace_func function (upon which the [Ruby profiler](http://www.rubygarden.org/ruby?Ruby_Profiler) Ruby profiler is implemented). While that’s true (to a point – the `set_trace_func` set_trace_func seems to be a pretty limited mechanism), the Ruby DTrace provider is nonetheless a great lurch forward for Ruby developers: it allows developers to use DTrace-specific constructs like aggregations and thread-local variables to hone in on a problem; it allows Ruby-related work performed lower in the stack (e.g., in the I/O subsystem, CPU dispatcher or network stack) to be connected to the Ruby code inducing it; it allows a running Ruby script to be instrumented (and reinstrumented) without stopping or restarting it; and it allows multiple, disjoint Ruby scripts to be coherently observed and understood as a single entity. More succinctly, it’s just damned cool. So thanks to Rich for developing the prototype provider – and if you’re a Ruby developer, enjoy!
