---
title: "Using DTrace to debug NTP"
date: 2005-07-27
url: https://bcantrill.dtrace.org/2005/07/27/using-dtrace-to-debug-ntp/
slug: using-dtrace-to-debug-ntp
word_count: 548
---

# Using DTrace to debug NTP Using DTrace to debug NTP Jul 27, 2005 Brian Utterbackhas a great blog entry describingusing DTrace to debug a really nasty problem in NTP. This problem is a good object lesson for two reasons: [Brian Utterback](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/blu/) Brian Utterback has a great blog entry describing [using DTrace to debug a really nasty problem in NTP](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/blu?entry=tricky_problem_with_ntp) using DTrace to debug a really nasty problem in NTP . This problem is a good object lesson for two reasons: * The pathology – a signal of mysterious origin killing an app – is a canonically nasty problem and (before DTrace) it was very difficult (or damned near impossible?) to diagnose. The pathology – a signal of mysterious origin killing an app – is a canonically nasty problem and (before DTrace) it was very difficult (or damned near impossible?) to diagnose. The pathology – a signal of mysterious origin killing an app – is a canonically nasty problem and (before DTrace) it was very difficult (or damned near impossible?) to diagnose. * While Brian was able to use DTrace to get a big jump on the problem, completely understanding it took some great insight on Brian’s part. This has been said before, but it merits reemphasis: DTrace is a tool, not a magician. That is, DTrace still needs to be used by someone with a brain. And not, by the way, because DTrace is difficult to use, but rather because systems – especially misbehahaving or suboptimal ones – have endemic complexity. We have tried to make it as easy as possible to use DTrace to understand that complexity, but the complexity exists nonetheless. While Brian was able to use DTrace to get a big jump on the problem, completely understanding it took some great insight on Brian’s part. This has been said before, but it merits reemphasis: DTrace is a tool, not a magician. That is, DTrace still needs to be used by someone with a brain. And not, by the way, because DTrace is difficult to use, but rather because systems – especially misbehahaving or suboptimal ones – have endemic complexity. We have tried to make it as easy as possible to use DTrace to understand that complexity, but the complexity exists nonetheless. While Brian was able to use DTrace to get a big jump on the problem, completely understanding it took some great insight on Brian’s part. This has been said before, but it merits reemphasis: DTrace is a tool, not a magician. That is, DTrace still needs to be used by someone with a brain. And not, by the way, because DTrace is difficult to use, but rather because systems – especially misbehahaving or suboptimal ones – have endemic complexity. We have tried to make it as easy as possible to use DTrace to understand that complexity, but the complexity exists nonetheless. Summary: DTrace allows you to solve problems that were previously unsolvable (or damned near) – but it means you’ll be using your brain more, not less, so you’d better stopstabbing it with Q-tips. Summary: DTrace allows you to solve problems that were previously unsolvable (or damned near) – but it means you’ll be using your brain more, not less, so you’d better stop [stabbing it with Q-tips](http://www.snpp.com/guides/brainspeaks.html) stabbing it with Q-tips .
