---
title: "Man, myth, legend"
date: 2005-09-13
url: https://bcantrill.dtrace.org/2005/09/13/man-myth-legend/
slug: man-myth-legend
word_count: 1296
---

# Man, myth, legend Man, myth, legend Sep 13, 2005 On a Sunday night shortly afterÂwe bought Kealia,Â I got a call at home fromÂJohnÂ Fowler. He asked me if I’d like to joinÂGlenn Weinbergand him the nextÂ morning to meet withÂAndy Bechtolsheimat Kealia’s offices in Palo Alto. It’s hard to express my excitementÂ at this proposition – itÂ was like asking a kid if he wants to go throw a ball aroundÂ with Joe DiMaggio. And indeed, my response was something akin to theÂ “Gee mister – that’d be swell!” that this image evokes… On a Sunday night shortly afterÂ [we bought Kealia](http://www.sun.com/smi/Press/sunflash/2004-04/sunflash.20040415.2.html) we bought Kealia ,Â I got a call at home fromÂ [JohnÂ Fowler](http://www.sun.com/aboutsun/media/ceo/exec_bios.html#jf) JohnÂ Fowler . He asked me if I’d like to joinÂ [Glenn Weinberg](http://blogs.sun.com/gaw) Glenn Weinberg and him the nextÂ morning to meet withÂ [Andy Bechtolsheim](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andy_Bechtolsheim) Andy Bechtolsheim at Kealia’s offices in Palo Alto. It’s hard to express my excitementÂ at this proposition – itÂ was like asking a kid if he wants to go throw a ball aroundÂ with Joe DiMaggio. And indeed, my response was something akin to theÂ “Gee mister – that’d be swell!” that this image evokes… When we walked in to Kealia’s offices the next morning,Â there, in the foyer, was Andy!Â Andy blinked for a moment, and then – without any introductions – beganÂ to excitedly describe some of his machines. Still talking,Â he marched to his office,Â whereupon he went to the whiteboard and startedÂ furiously drawingÂ block diagrams. Here, at long last, was the Real Deal: a fabledÂ engineer who didn’t disappoint – a giant whoÂ dwarfed the substantial legend that proceeded him.Â After several minutes at the whiteboard, Andy got so excited that heÂ had to actuallyÂ get the plans to show us how some particular piece had been engineered.Â And with that, he flew out of the room. When we walked in to Kealia’s offices the next morning,Â there, in the foyer, was Andy!Â Andy blinked for a moment, and then – without any introductions – beganÂ to excitedly describe some of his machines. Still talking,Â he marched to his office,Â whereupon he went to the whiteboard and startedÂ furiously drawingÂ block diagrams. Here, at long last, was the Real Deal: a fabledÂ engineer who didn’t disappoint – a giant whoÂ dwarfed the substantial legend that proceeded him.Â After several minutes at the whiteboard, Andy got so excited that heÂ had to actuallyÂ get the plans to show us how some particular piece had been engineered.Â And with that, he flew out of the room. As we caught our breath, Glenn looked at me and said “just so you know,Â this is what it’s like trying to talk to you.” While I was still tryingÂ to figure out if this was a compliment or an insult (which I still haven’tÂ figured out, by the way), Andy flew back in,Â unfurled some plans for a machine and excitedly pointed out some of theÂ finer details of his design. Andy went on for a few more minutes when,Â like a raging prairie fire that had suddenly hit a fireline, heÂ went quiet. With that, I kicked the door down (metaphorically) andÂ started describing what we had been working on inÂSolaris 10.Â (After all, John hadn’t brought me along to just sit backÂ and watch.) As I went through revolutionary feature afterÂ revolutionary feature, I wasÂ astounded by how quickly Andy grasped detail – he asked incisiveÂ questions that reflected a greater understanding of software than anyÂ other hardware engineer I had ever encountered. And as he seemed to beÂ absorbing detail faster and faster, I began delivering it faster and faster. Now, asÂothersÂ have observed, I’m not exactly a slow talker; thisÂ might have been one of the few times in my life where I thought I actually needed to speakfasterto stay in front of my audience. Whew!Â Most impressive of all, Andy had a keen intuition for thesystem–Â he immediately saw how his innovative hardware and our innovative software could combine toÂ deliver some uniquely innovative systems to our customers. He was excited about our software; we were excited about his hardware.Â How much better than that does it get? As we caught our breath, Glenn looked at me and said “just so you know,Â this is what it’s like trying to talk to you.” While I was still tryingÂ to figure out if this was a compliment or an insult (which I still haven’tÂ figured out, by the way), Andy flew back in,Â unfurled some plans for a machine and excitedly pointed out some of theÂ finer details of his design. Andy went on for a few more minutes when,Â like a raging prairie fire that had suddenly hit a fireline, heÂ went quiet. With that, I kicked the door down (metaphorically) andÂ started describing what we had been working on inÂ [Solaris 10](http://www.sun.com/software/solaris/) Solaris 10 .Â (After all, John hadn’t brought me along to just sit backÂ and watch.) As I went through revolutionary feature afterÂ revolutionary feature, I wasÂ astounded by how quickly Andy grasped detail – he asked incisiveÂ questions that reflected a greater understanding of software than anyÂ other hardware engineer I had ever encountered. And as he seemed to beÂ absorbing detail faster and faster, I began delivering it faster and faster. Now, asÂ [othersÂ have observed](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/dlacher?entry=dreaming_in_dtrace) othersÂ have observed , I’m not exactly a slow talker; thisÂ might have been one of the few times in my life where I thought I actually needed to speak *faster* faster to stay in front of my audience. Whew!Â Most impressive of all, Andy had a keen intuition for the *system* system –Â he immediately saw how his innovative hardware and our innovative software could combine toÂ deliver some uniquely innovative systems to our customers. He was excited about our software; we were excited about his hardware.Â How much better than that does it get? Needless to say, ever since that morning – which was nearly a year andÂ a half ago now – I have eagerly awaited the day that Andy’s boxes would ship. If you’ve talked to me over the last year, you know that I’veÂ been very bullish on Sun; now you know why. (Well, now you have atasteas to why; believe it or not, Andy’s best boxes are stillÂ to come.)Â Not everyone can own a car designed byÂEnzo Ferrarior a lamp crafted byÂLouisÂ Comfort Tiffany– but atÂjust over two grand a pop,Â pretty much everyonecanown a machine designed by the greatestÂ single-board computer designer in history. Congratulations AndyÂ and team on an historic launch! And might I add that it was especiallyÂ fitting that it was welcomed with what is easily theÂfunniest ad in Sun’s history. Needless to say, ever since that morning – which was nearly a year andÂ a half ago now – I have eagerly awaited the day that Andy’s boxes would ship. If you’ve talked to me over the last year, you know that I’veÂ been very bullish on Sun; now you know why. (Well, now you have a *taste* taste as to why; believe it or not, Andy’s best boxes are stillÂ to come.)Â Not everyone can own a car designed byÂ [Enzo Ferrari](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enzo_Ferrari) Enzo Ferrari or a lamp crafted byÂ [LouisÂ Comfort Tiffany](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Louis_Comfort_Tiffany) LouisÂ Comfort Tiffany – but atÂ [just over two grand a pop](http://www.sun.com/servers/entry/x4100/) just over two grand a pop ,Â pretty much everyone *can* can own a machine designed by the greatestÂ single-board computer designer in history. Congratulations AndyÂ and team on an historic launch! And might I add that it was especiallyÂ fitting that it was welcomed with what is easily theÂ [funniest ad in Sun’s history](/2005/09/13/man-myth-legend/x4100_centerfold.pdf) funniest ad in Sun’s history .
