---
title: "DTrace at OSCON"
date: 2005-07-31
url: https://bcantrill.dtrace.org/2005/07/31/dtrace-at-oscon/
slug: dtrace-at-oscon
word_count: 548
---

# DTrace at OSCON DTrace at OSCON Jul 31, 2005 So I’ll be atOSCONthis week, where I’ll be giving two presentations onDTrace. The first is a free tutorial thatKeithand I will be giving onOpenSolaris development with DTrace. This tutorial is on Tuesday from 1:30p to 5p in room D140, and did I mention that this tutorial isfree? So even if you didn’t plan to attend any of the tutorials, if you’re going to be in Portland on Tuesday afternoon, you should feel free to swing by – no need to preregister. This tutorial should be fun – we’re going to keep in very hands-on, and it will be a demo-intensive introduction to both DTrace and to our larger tool-set that we use to both build OpenSolaris and to diagnose it when it all goes horribly wrong. Hopefully you can join us! So I’ll be at [OSCON](http://conferences.oreillynet.com/os2005/) OSCON this week, where I’ll be giving two presentations on [DTrace](http://opensolaris.org/os/community/dtrace/) DTrace . The first is a free tutorial that [Keith](http://blogs.sun.com/wesolows) Keith and I will be giving on [OpenSolaris development with DTrace](http://conferences.oreillynet.com/cs/os2005/view/e_sess/7452) OpenSolaris development with DTrace . This tutorial is on Tuesday from 1:30p to 5p in room D140, and did I mention that this tutorial is **free** free ? So even if you didn’t plan to attend any of the tutorials, if you’re going to be in Portland on Tuesday afternoon, you should feel free to swing by – no need to preregister. This tutorial should be fun – we’re going to keep in very hands-on, and it will be a demo-intensive introduction to both DTrace and to our larger tool-set that we use to both build OpenSolaris and to diagnose it when it all goes horribly wrong. Hopefully you can join us! The second session isa presentation exclusively on DTrace. This is quite a bit shorter (it’s 45 minutes), so this presentation is going to give a quick review of the DTrace fundamentals, and then focus on the confluence of DTrace and open source – both what DTrace can do for your open source project, and what you can do (if you’re so inclined) for the DTrace open source project. This session is on Thursday at 4:30 in Portland room 255. The second session is [a presentation exclusively on DTrace](http://conferences.oreillynet.com/cs/os2005/view/e_sess/6970) a presentation exclusively on DTrace . This is quite a bit shorter (it’s 45 minutes), so this presentation is going to give a quick review of the DTrace fundamentals, and then focus on the confluence of DTrace and open source – both what DTrace can do for your open source project, and what you can do (if you’re so inclined) for the DTrace open source project. This session is on Thursday at 4:30 in Portland room 255. Other than that, my schedule is filled only with odds and ends; if you’re going to be at OSCON and you want to connect, drop me a line or leave a message for me at my hotel, the5th Avenue Suites. See you in Portland! Other than that, my schedule is filled only with odds and ends; if you’re going to be at OSCON and you want to connect, drop me a line or leave a message for me at my hotel, the [5th Avenue Suites](http://www.5thavenuesuites.com/) 5th Avenue Suites . See you in Portland!
