---
title: "Using DTrace to understand GNOME"
date: 2005-07-11
url: https://bcantrill.dtrace.org/2005/07/11/using-dtrace-to-understand-gnome/
slug: using-dtrace-to-understand-gnome
word_count: 2019
---

# Using DTrace to understand GNOME Using DTrace to understand GNOME Jul 11, 2005 I read with some interest about theGNOME startup bounty. AsStephen O’Grady pointed out, this problem is indeed perfect forDTrace. To get a feel for the problem, I wrote a very simple D script: I read with some interest about the [GNOME startup bounty](http://www.gnome.org/bounties/Optimization.html#306042) GNOME startup bounty . As [Stephen O’Grady pointed out](http://www.redmonk.com/sogrady/archives/000809.html) Stephen O’Grady pointed out , this problem is indeed perfect for [DTrace](http://opensolaris.org/os/community/dtrace/) DTrace . To get a feel for the problem, I wrote a very simple D script: ``` #!/usr/sbin/dtrace -s #pragma D option quiet proc:::exec-success /execname == "gnome-session"/ { start = timestamp; go = 1; } io:::start /go/ { printf("%10d { -> I/O %d %s %s %s }\n", (timestamp - start) / 1000000, pid, execname, args[0]->b_flags & B_READ ? "reads" : "writes", args[2]->fi_pathname); } io:::done /go/ { printf("%10d { fi_pathname); } io:::start /go && ((struct buf *)arg0)->b_file != NULL && ((struct buf *)arg0)->b_file->v_path == NULL/ { printf("%10s (vp %p)\n", "", ((struct buf *)arg0)->b_file); } io:::start /go/ { @apps[execname] = count(); @files[args[2]->fi_pathname] = count(); @appsfiles[execname, args[2]->fi_pathname] = count(); } proc:::exec /go/ { self->parent = execname; } proc:::exec-success /self->parent != NULL/ { printf("%10d -> %d %s (from %d %s)\n", (timestamp - start) / 1000000, pid, execname, curpsinfo->pr_ppid, self->parent); self->parent = NULL; } proc:::exit /go/ { printf("%10d pr_flag & PR_IDLE)/ { printf("%10d [ idle ]\n", (timestamp - start) / 1000000); } END { printf("\n %-72s %s\n", "APPLICATION", "I/Os"); printa(" %-72s %@d\n", @apps); printf("\n %-72s %s\n", "FILE", "I/Os"); printa(" %-72s %@d\n", @files); printf("\n %-16s %-55s %s\n", "APPLICATION", "FILE", "I/Os"); printa(" %-16s %-55s %@d\n", @appsfiles); } ``` #!/usr/sbin/dtrace -s #pragma D option quiet proc:::exec-success /execname == "gnome-session"/ { start = timestamp; go = 1; } io:::start /go/ { printf("%10d { -> I/O %d %s %s %s }\n", (timestamp - start) / 1000000, pid, execname, args[0]->b_flags & B_READ ? "reads" : "writes", args[2]->fi_pathname); } io:::done /go/ { printf("%10d { fi_pathname); } io:::start /go && ((struct buf *)arg0)->b_file != NULL && ((struct buf *)arg0)->b_file->v_path == NULL/ { printf("%10s (vp %p)\n", "", ((struct buf *)arg0)->b_file); } io:::start /go/ { @apps[execname] = count(); @files[args[2]->fi_pathname] = count(); @appsfiles[execname, args[2]->fi_pathname] = count(); } proc:::exec /go/ { self->parent = execname; } proc:::exec-success /self->parent != NULL/ { printf("%10d -> %d %s (from %d %s)\n", (timestamp - start) / 1000000, pid, execname, curpsinfo->pr_ppid, self->parent); self->parent = NULL; } proc:::exit /go/ { printf("%10d pr_flag & PR_IDLE)/ { printf("%10d [ idle ]\n", (timestamp - start) / 1000000); } END { printf("\n %-72s %s\n", "APPLICATION", "I/Os"); printa(" %-72s %@d\n", @apps); printf("\n %-72s %s\n", "FILE", "I/Os"); printa(" %-72s %@d\n", @files); printf("\n %-16s %-55s %s\n", "APPLICATION", "FILE", "I/Os"); printa(" %-16s %-55s %@d\n", @appsfiles); } This script uses a combination of CPU sampling and I/O tracing to determine roughly what’s going on over the course of logging in. I ran the above script on on myAcer Ferrari 3400laptop runningOpenSolarisby dropping to the command-line login after a reboot and running: This script uses a combination of CPU sampling and I/O tracing to determine roughly what’s going on over the course of logging in. I ran the above script on on my [Acer Ferrari 3400](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/chandan?entry=pictures_solaris_on_ferrari) Acer Ferrari 3400 laptop running [OpenSolaris](http://opensolaris.org) OpenSolaris by dropping to the command-line login after a reboot and running: ``` # nohup ./login.d > /var/tmp/login.out & ``` # nohup ./login.d > /var/tmp/login.out & I then logged in, and made sure that the first thing I did was launch a gnome-terminal topkill dtrace. (This could obviously be made quite a bit more precise, but it works as a crude way of indicating the completion of login.) Here isthe output from performing this experiment. The first column is the millisecond offset from the start of gnome-session. CPU samples are contained within square brackets, launched programs are contained withing curly braces, and I/O is explicitly noted. An I/O summary is provided at the end. A couple of observations: I then logged in, and made sure that the first thing I did was launch a gnome-terminal to `pkill dtrace` pkill dtrace . (This could obviously be made quite a bit more precise, but it works as a crude way of indicating the completion of login.) Here is [the output from performing this experiment](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/resources/bmc/login.out) the output from performing this experiment . The first column is the millisecond offset from the start of gnome-session. CPU samples are contained within square brackets, launched programs are contained withing curly braces, and I/O is explicitly noted. An I/O summary is provided at the end. A couple of observations: * Nearly one third of all I/O is to shared object text and read-only data. This is classic death-of-a-thousand-cuts, and it’s hard to see that there’s an easy way to fix this. But perhaps text could be reordered to save some I/O? More investigation is probably merited here. Nearly one third of all I/O is to shared object text and read-only data. This is classic death-of-a-thousand-cuts, and it’s hard to see that there’s an easy way to fix this. But perhaps text could be reordered to save some I/O? More investigation is probably merited here. Nearly one third of all I/O is to shared object text and read-only data. This is classic death-of-a-thousand-cuts, and it’s hard to see that there’s an easy way to fix this. But perhaps text could be reordered to save some I/O? More investigation is probably merited here. * Over a quarter of all I/O is fromGConf– and many of these are from wandering around an expansive directory hierarchy looking for configuration information. It is well-known that the XML backend is a big performance problem, and a better backend is apparently being worked on. At any rate, solving this problem is clearly inGConf’s future. Over a quarter of all I/O is fromGConf– and many of these are from wandering around an expansive directory hierarchy looking for configuration information. It is well-known that the XML backend is a big performance problem, and a better backend is apparently being worked on. At any rate, solving this problem is clearly inGConf’s future. Over a quarter of all I/O is from [GConf](http://www.gnome.org/projects/gconf/) GConf – and many of these are from wandering around an expansive directory hierarchy looking for configuration information. It is well-known that the XML backend is a big performance problem, and a better backend is apparently being worked on. At any rate, solving this problem is clearly in [GConf’s future](http://www.gnome.org/projects/gconf/plans.html) GConf’s future . * Of the remaining I/O, a bunch is to icon files.Glynn Fosterpointed out that this looks to be addressed by theGTK+ gtk-update-icon-cache, new in GTK+ 2.6 and contained withinGNOME 2.10, so this experiment will obviously need to be repeated on GNOME 2.10. Of the remaining I/O, a bunch is to icon files.Glynn Fosterpointed out that this looks to be addressed by theGTK+ gtk-update-icon-cache, new in GTK+ 2.6 and contained withinGNOME 2.10, so this experiment will obviously need to be repeated on GNOME 2.10. Of the remaining I/O, a bunch is to icon files. [Glynn Foster](http://www.gnome.org/~gman/) Glynn Foster pointed out that this looks to be addressed by the [GTK+ gtk-update-icon-cache](http://developer.gnome.org/doc/API/2.2/gtk/gtk-update-icon-cache.html) GTK+ gtk-update-icon-cache , new in GTK+ 2.6 and contained within [GNOME 2.10](http://www.gnomejournal.org/article/17/gnome-210-desktop-and-development-platform) GNOME 2.10 , so this experiment will obviously need to be repeated on GNOME 2.10. * CPU utilization doesn’t look like a big issue – or it’s one that is at least dwarfed by the cost of performing I/O. That said, gconfd-2 looks to be a bit piggy in this department as well. We’re only using CPU sampling – and we’re using a pretty coarse grained sample – and gconfd-2 still showed up. More precise investigation into CPU utilization can be performed with theschedprovider and itson-cpuandoff-cpuprobes. CPU utilization doesn’t look like a big issue – or it’s one that is at least dwarfed by the cost of performing I/O. That said, gconfd-2 looks to be a bit piggy in this department as well. We’re only using CPU sampling – and we’re using a pretty coarse grained sample – and gconfd-2 still showed up. More precise investigation into CPU utilization can be performed with theschedprovider and itson-cpuandoff-cpuprobes. CPU utilization doesn’t look like a big issue – or it’s one that is at least dwarfed by the cost of performing I/O. That said, gconfd-2 looks to be a bit piggy in this department as well. We’re only using CPU sampling – and we’re using a pretty coarse grained sample – and gconfd-2 still showed up. More precise investigation into CPU utilization can be performed with the `sched` sched provider and its `on-cpu` on-cpu and `off-cpu` off-cpu probes. And an end-note: you might note many files named “<unknown>” in the output. This is due to I/Os being induced by lookups that are going through directories and/or symlinks that haven’t been explicitly opened. For these I/Os, my script also gives you the pointer to the vnode structure in the kernel; you can get the path to these by using::vnode2pathinMDB: And an end-note: you might note many files named “ `<unknown>` <unknown> ” in the output. This is due to I/Os being induced by lookups that are going through directories and/or symlinks that haven’t been explicitly opened. For these I/Os, my script also gives you the pointer to the vnode structure in the kernel; you can get the path to these by using `::vnode2path` ::vnode2path in [MDB](http://opensolaris.org/os/community/mdb/) MDB : ``` # mdb -k Loading modules: [ unix krtld genunix specfs dtrace ufs ip sctp usba uhci s1394 random nca lofs nfs audiosup sppp ptm ipc ] > ffffffff8f6851c0::vnode2path /usr/sfw/lib/libXrender.so.1 > ``` # mdb -k Loading modules: [ unix krtld genunix specfs dtrace ufs ip sctp usba uhci s1394 random nca lofs nfs audiosup sppp ptm ipc ] > ffffffff8f6851c0::vnode2path /usr/sfw/lib/libXrender.so.1 > Yes, having to do this sucks a bit, andit’s a known issue. And rumor has it thatEriceven has a workspace with the fix, so stay tuned… Yes, having to do this sucks a bit, and [it’s a known issue](http://bugs.opensolaris.org/bugdatabase/view_bug.do?bug_id=6175313) it’s a known issue . And rumor has it that [Eric](http://blogs.sun.com/eschrock) Eric even has a workspace with the fix, so stay tuned… Update: Eric pointed me to a prototype with the fix, and I reran the script on a GNOME cold start;here is the output from that run. Interestingly, because the symlinks now show up, a little postprocessing reveals that we chased nearly eighty symlinks on startup! From the output, reading many of these took 10 to 20 milliseconds; we might be spending as much as one second of GNOME startup blocked on I/O just to chase symlinks! Ouch! Again, it’s not clear how one would fix this; having an app link tolibpango-1.0.so.0and notlibpango-1.0.so.400.1is clearly a Good Thing, and having this be a symlink instead of a hardlink is clearly a Good Thing – but all of that goodness leaves you with a read dependency that’s hard to work around. Anyway, be looking for Eric’s fix inOpenSolarisand then in an upcomingSolaris Expressrelease; it makes this kind of analysis much easier – and thanks Eric for the quick prototype! **Update** Update : Eric pointed me to a prototype with the fix, and I reran the script on a GNOME cold start; [here is the output from that run](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/resources/bmc/login.out-clean) here is the output from that run . Interestingly, because the symlinks now show up, a little postprocessing reveals that we chased nearly eighty symlinks on startup! From the output, reading many of these took 10 to 20 milliseconds; we might be spending as much as one second of GNOME startup blocked on I/O just to chase symlinks! Ouch! Again, it’s not clear how one would fix this; having an app link to `libpango-1.0.so.0` libpango-1.0.so.0 and not `libpango-1.0.so.400.1` libpango-1.0.so.400.1 is clearly a Good Thing, and having this be a symlink instead of a hardlink is clearly a Good Thing – but all of that goodness leaves you with a read dependency that’s hard to work around. Anyway, be looking for Eric’s fix in [OpenSolaris](http://opensolaris.org) OpenSolaris and then in an upcoming [Solaris Express](http://www.sun.com/software/solaris/solaris-express/) Solaris Express release; it makes this kind of analysis much easier – and thanks Eric for the quick prototype! Technorati tags:OpenSolarisSolarisDTraceGNOME Technorati tags: [OpenSolaris](http://technorati.com/tag/OpenSolaris) OpenSolaris [Solaris](http://technorati.com/tag/Solaris) Solaris [DTrace](http://technorati.com/tag/DTrace) DTrace [GNOME](http://technorati.com/tag/GNOME) GNOME
