---
title: "Welcome to ZFS!"
date: 2005-11-16
url: https://bcantrill.dtrace.org/2005/11/16/welcome-to-zfs/
slug: welcome-to-zfs
word_count: 3810
---

# Welcome to ZFS! Welcome to ZFS! Nov 16, 2005 If you haven’t already seen it,ÂZFS is now availableÂ for download, marking a major milestone in the history of filesystems.Â Today is a way station down a long road:Â for asÂ long as I have knownÂJeff Bonwick,Â he has wanted to solve the filesystem problem – and about five years ago,Â Jeff set outÂ to do just that, starting (as Jeff is wont to do) from a blank sheet ofÂ paper. I vividly remember Jeff describing some of his nascent ideas onÂ my whiteboard; the ideas were radical and revolutionary, theirÂ implications manifold. I remember thinking “he’s either missedÂ something basic that somehow invalidates these ideas – or this is the mostÂ important development in storage since RAID.”Â AsÂI recently recounted,Â Jeff is the reason that I came to Sun almost a decade ago – and inÂ particular, I was drawn by Jeff’s contagious belief that nothing isÂ impossible simplyÂ because it hasn’t been done before. So I knew better than to doubtÂ him at the time – and I knew that the road ahead promised excitementÂ if nothing else. Years after that moment,Â there is no other conclusion left to be had:ÂZFSisthe most important revolution in storage software in twoÂ decades – and may be the most important idea since the filesystem itself.Â That may seem a heady claim, but keep reading… If you haven’t already seen it,Â [ZFS is now availableÂ for download](http://opensolaris.org/os/downloads/) ZFS is now availableÂ for download , marking a major milestone in the history of filesystems.Â Today is a way station down a long road:Â for asÂ long as I have knownÂ [Jeff Bonwick](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/bonwick) Jeff Bonwick ,Â he has wanted to solve the filesystem problem – and about five years ago,Â Jeff set outÂ to do just that, starting (as Jeff is wont to do) from a blank sheet ofÂ paper. I vividly remember Jeff describing some of his nascent ideas onÂ my whiteboard; the ideas were radical and revolutionary, theirÂ implications manifold. I remember thinking “he’s either missedÂ something basic that somehow invalidates these ideas – or this is the mostÂ important development in storage since RAID.”Â AsÂ [I recently recounted](http://research.sun.com/minds/2005-0929/) I recently recounted ,Â Jeff is the reason that I came to Sun almost a decade ago – and inÂ particular, I was drawn by Jeff’s contagious belief that nothing isÂ impossible simplyÂ because it hasn’t been done before. So I knew better than to doubtÂ him at the time – and I knew that the road ahead promised excitementÂ if nothing else. Years after that moment,Â there is no other conclusion left to be had:Â [ZFS](http://opensolaris.org/os/community/zfs) ZFS **is** is the most important revolution in storage software in twoÂ decades – and may be the most important idea since the filesystem itself.Â That may seem a heady claim, but keep reading… To get an idea of what ZFS can do,Â first check outÂDan Price’s awesomeÂZFS flashÂ demoThen join me on a tour of today’s ZFS blog entries, as ZFS developers and users inside Sun illustrate theÂ power of ZFS: ease of administration, absolute reliability andÂ rippin’ performance. To get an idea of what ZFS can do,Â first check outÂ [Dan Price](http://blogs.sun.com/dp) Dan Price ’s awesomeÂ [ZFS flashÂ demo](http://opensolaris.org/os/community/zfs/demos/basics/) ZFS flashÂ demo Then join me on a tour of today’s ZFS blog entries, as ZFS developers and users inside Sun illustrate theÂ power of ZFS: ease of administration, absolute reliability andÂ rippin’ performance. * Administration.If you’re an administrator, start your ZFS blog tour withÂMartin Englund‘sÂ entry onÂZFS from a sysadmin’s view. Martin walks you through the ease of settingÂ up ZFS; there are no hidden wires – it reallyisthat easy!Â And if, as a self-defence mechanism, your brain refuses to let you recallÂ the slog of traditional volume management, check outÂTim Foster‘sÂ entryÂcomparingÂ ZFS management to Veritas management. (And have we mentionedÂthe price?)Â For insight into the design principles that guided the developmentÂ of the administration tools, check outÂEric Schrock‘sÂ entry onÂthe principles of the ZFS CLI. Eric’s entry and his design reflectÂ the principles that we used inÂDTraceas well:Â make it simple to do simple things and make itÂ possible to do complicated things.Â As you can imagine, this simplicity of management is winning fans bothÂ inside and outside of Sun. For some testimonials, check outÂLin Ling‘sÂ entry onthe loveÂ for ZFS– both Lin’s and our Beta customers’.Â As Lin’s entry implies,Â a common theme among ZFS users is “if I only had this when…”; checkÂ outÂJames McPhearson‘sÂ entryÂwishing he had ZFS back in the day.And if you think that the management of ZFS couldn’t get any easier, checkÂ outÂSteve Talley‘sÂ entry onÂmanaging ZFS from your browser.Â Steve’s work highlightsÂ the proper role for GUI admin tools in a system: they should makeÂ something that’salready simple even simpler. TheyÂ shouldnotbe used to smear lipstick over a hideously over-complicatedÂ system – doing so leads to an unresolvable rift betweenÂ what the tool is telling you the system looks like, and what the systemÂactuallylooks like.Â Thanks to the simplicity of ZFS itself, there is no secondÂ guessing about what the GUI is actually doing under the hood – it’sÂ all just gravy!Speaking of gravy,Â check out the confluence of ZFS with another revolutionary Solaris technologyÂ inÂDan Price‘sÂ entry onÂZFS and Zonesthanks to some great integration work,localzone administrators can have the full power of ZFSÂ without compromising the security of the system!For details on particular features of ZFS, check outÂMark Maybee‘sÂ entry onÂquotas and reservations in ZFS. UnlikeÂ some other systems, quotas and reservations are first-class citizen iin ZFS, not bolted-on afterthoughts.Â Die,/usr/sbin/quota, die!Â And for details on another feature of ZFS, check outÂMark Shellenbaum‘sÂ entry onÂaccess controllists in ZFS, andÂLisa Week‘sÂ entry describingÂwhyZFS adopted the NFSv4 ACL model.Â Like quotas and reservations, ACLs were a part ofÂ the design of ZFS – not something that was carpet-bombed over the sourceÂ after the fact. Administration.If you’re an administrator, start your ZFS blog tour withÂMartin Englund‘sÂ entry onÂZFS from a sysadmin’s view. Martin walks you through the ease of settingÂ up ZFS; there are no hidden wires – it reallyisthat easy!Â And if, as a self-defence mechanism, your brain refuses to let you recallÂ the slog of traditional volume management, check outÂTim Foster‘sÂ entryÂcomparingÂ ZFS management to Veritas management. (And have we mentionedÂthe price?)Â For insight into the design principles that guided the developmentÂ of the administration tools, check outÂEric Schrock‘sÂ entry onÂthe principles of the ZFS CLI. Eric’s entry and his design reflectÂ the principles that we used inÂDTraceas well:Â make it simple to do simple things and make itÂ possible to do complicated things.Â As you can imagine, this simplicity of management is winning fans bothÂ inside and outside of Sun. For some testimonials, check outÂLin Ling‘sÂ entry onthe loveÂ for ZFS– both Lin’s and our Beta customers’.Â As Lin’s entry implies,Â a common theme among ZFS users is “if I only had this when…”; checkÂ outÂJames McPhearson‘sÂ entryÂwishing he had ZFS back in the day. **Administration.** Administration. If you’re an administrator, start your ZFS blog tour withÂ [Martin Englund](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/georges) Martin Englund ‘sÂ entry onÂ [ZFS from a sysadmin’s view](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/martin#zfs_from_a_sysadmin_point) ZFS from a sysadmin’s view . Martin walks you through the ease of settingÂ up ZFS; there are no hidden wires – it really *is* is that easy!Â And if, as a self-defence mechanism, your brain refuses to let you recallÂ the slog of traditional volume management, check outÂ [Tim Foster](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/timf) Tim Foster ‘sÂ entryÂ [comparingÂ ZFS management to Veritas management](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/timf#zfs_is_that_it) comparingÂ ZFS management to Veritas management . (And have we mentionedÂ [the price](http://www.sun.com/software/solaris/index.jsp) the price ?)Â For insight into the design principles that guided the developmentÂ of the administration tools, check outÂ [Eric Schrock](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/eschrock) Eric Schrock ‘sÂ entry onÂ [the principles of the ZFS CLI](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/eschrock#principles_of_the_zfs_cli) the principles of the ZFS CLI . Eric’s entry and his design reflectÂ the principles that we used inÂ [DTrace](http://opensolaris.org/os/community/dtrace) DTrace as well:Â make it simple to do simple things and make itÂ possible to do complicated things.Â As you can imagine, this simplicity of management is winning fans bothÂ inside and outside of Sun. For some testimonials, check outÂ [Lin Ling](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/lling) Lin Ling ‘sÂ entry on [the loveÂ for ZFS](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/lling#i_love_zfs) the loveÂ for ZFS – both Lin’s and our Beta customers’.Â As Lin’s entry implies,Â a common theme among ZFS users is “if I only had this when…”; checkÂ outÂ [James McPhearson](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/jmcp) James McPhearson ‘sÂ entryÂ [wishing he had ZFS back in the day](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/jmcp#back_in_the_old_days) wishing he had ZFS back in the day . And if you think that the management of ZFS couldn’t get any easier, checkÂ outÂSteve Talley‘sÂ entry onÂmanaging ZFS from your browser.Â Steve’s work highlightsÂ the proper role for GUI admin tools in a system: they should makeÂ something that’salready simple even simpler. TheyÂ shouldnotbe used to smear lipstick over a hideously over-complicatedÂ system – doing so leads to an unresolvable rift betweenÂ what the tool is telling you the system looks like, and what the systemÂactuallylooks like.Â Thanks to the simplicity of ZFS itself, there is no secondÂ guessing about what the GUI is actually doing under the hood – it’sÂ all just gravy! And if you think that the management of ZFS couldn’t get any easier, checkÂ outÂ [Steve Talley](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/talley) Steve Talley ‘sÂ entry onÂ [managing ZFS from your browser](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/talley#manage_zfs_from_your_browser) managing ZFS from your browser .Â Steve’s work highlightsÂ the proper role for GUI admin tools in a system: they should makeÂ something that’s *already simple even simpler* already simple even simpler . TheyÂ should **not** not be used to smear lipstick over a hideously over-complicatedÂ system – doing so leads to an unresolvable rift betweenÂ what the tool is telling you the system looks like, and what the systemÂ *actually* actually looks like.Â Thanks to the simplicity of ZFS itself, there is no secondÂ guessing about what the GUI is actually doing under the hood – it’sÂ all just gravy! Speaking of gravy,Â check out the confluence of ZFS with another revolutionary Solaris technologyÂ inÂDan Price‘sÂ entry onÂZFS and Zonesthanks to some great integration work,localzone administrators can have the full power of ZFSÂ without compromising the security of the system! Speaking of gravy,Â check out the confluence of ZFS with another revolutionary Solaris technologyÂ inÂ [Dan Price](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/markm) Dan Price ‘sÂ entry onÂ [ZFS and Zones](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/dp#zfs_and_zones_z_s) ZFS and Zones thanks to some great integration work, *local* local zone administrators can have the full power of ZFSÂ without compromising the security of the system! For details on particular features of ZFS, check outÂMark Maybee‘sÂ entry onÂquotas and reservations in ZFS. UnlikeÂ some other systems, quotas and reservations are first-class citizen iin ZFS, not bolted-on afterthoughts.Â Die,/usr/sbin/quota, die!Â And for details on another feature of ZFS, check outÂMark Shellenbaum‘sÂ entry onÂaccess controllists in ZFS, andÂLisa Week‘sÂ entry describingÂwhyZFS adopted the NFSv4 ACL model.Â Like quotas and reservations, ACLs were a part ofÂ the design of ZFS – not something that was carpet-bombed over the sourceÂ after the fact. For details on particular features of ZFS, check outÂ [Mark Maybee](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/markm) Mark Maybee ‘sÂ entry onÂ [quotas and reservations in ZFS](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/markm#filesystem_quotas_and_reservations_on) quotas and reservations in ZFS . UnlikeÂ some other systems, quotas and reservations are first-class citizen iin ZFS, not bolted-on afterthoughts.Â Die, `/usr/sbin/quota` /usr/sbin/quota , die!Â And for details on another feature of ZFS, check outÂ [Mark Shellenbaum](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/marks) Mark Shellenbaum ‘sÂ entry onÂ [access control](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/marks#zfs_acls) access control [lists in ZFS](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/marks#zfs_acls) lists in ZFS , andÂ [Lisa Week](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/lisaweek) Lisa Week ‘sÂ entry describingÂ [why](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/lisaweek#nfsv4_and_zfs_acls) why [ZFS adopted the NFSv4 ACL model](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/lisaweek#nfsv4_and_zfs_acls) ZFS adopted the NFSv4 ACL model .Â Like quotas and reservations, ACLs were a part ofÂ the design of ZFS – not something that was carpet-bombed over the sourceÂ after the fact. * Reliability. Unlike virtually every other filesystem thatÂ has come before it, ZFS isdesignedaround unreliable hardware.Â This design-center means that ZFS can detect – and correct! – errorsÂ that other filesystems just silently propagate to the user. To get aÂ visceral feel for this, readÂEric Lowe’s entryÂ onÂZFS saving the day. Reading this entry will send a chill up yourÂ spine: Eric had a data-corrupting hardware problem thatÂhe didn’t know he hadÂ until ZFS. How much data is being corrupted out there today becauseÂ pre-ZFS filesystems are too trusting of faulty hardware? More to theÂ point, how much ofyourdata is being corrupted today?Â Yeah – scary, ain’t it? And not only can ZFS detect hardware errors,Â in a mirrored configuration it cancorrectthem.Â Fortunately, you don’t have to have bustedÂ hardware to see this: look atÂTim Cook’s entryÂdemonstrating ZFS’s self-healingby usingddto simulateÂ date corruption.But if problems like Eric’s are all over the place, how is anyone’s data everÂ correct? The answer is pretty simple, if expensive: you pay forÂ reliability byÂ buyingÂover-priced hardware.Â That is, we’ve compensated for dumb software by having smart (and expensive)Â hardware. ZFS flips the economics on its head: smart software allowsÂ for stupid (and cheap) hardware – with ultra-high reliability.Â This is a profound shift; for more details on it check outÂRichard Elling‘sÂ entry onÂthe reliability of ZFS.ZFS is reliable by its architecture, but what of the implementation?Â AsBill Moorewrites,Âtesting ZFS was every bit as important as writing it.Â And testing ZFS involved many people, asÂJim Walkerdescribes in his entry onÂthe scopeÂ of the ZFS testing effort. Reliability. Unlike virtually every other filesystem thatÂ has come before it, ZFS isdesignedaround unreliable hardware.Â This design-center means that ZFS can detect – and correct! – errorsÂ that other filesystems just silently propagate to the user. To get aÂ visceral feel for this, readÂEric Lowe’s entryÂ onÂZFS saving the day. Reading this entry will send a chill up yourÂ spine: Eric had a data-corrupting hardware problem thatÂhe didn’t know he hadÂ until ZFS. How much data is being corrupted out there today becauseÂ pre-ZFS filesystems are too trusting of faulty hardware? More to theÂ point, how much ofyourdata is being corrupted today?Â Yeah – scary, ain’t it? And not only can ZFS detect hardware errors,Â in a mirrored configuration it cancorrectthem.Â Fortunately, you don’t have to have bustedÂ hardware to see this: look atÂTim Cook’s entryÂdemonstrating ZFS’s self-healingby usingddto simulateÂ date corruption.But if problems like Eric’s are all over the place, how is anyone’s data everÂ correct? The answer is pretty simple, if expensive: you pay forÂ reliability byÂ buyingÂover-priced hardware.Â That is, we’ve compensated for dumb software by having smart (and expensive)Â hardware. ZFS flips the economics on its head: smart software allowsÂ for stupid (and cheap) hardware – with ultra-high reliability.Â This is a profound shift; for more details on it check outÂRichard Elling‘sÂ entry onÂthe reliability of ZFS.ZFS is reliable by its architecture, but what of the implementation?Â AsBill Moorewrites,Âtesting ZFS was every bit as important as writing it.Â And testing ZFS involved many people, asÂJim Walkerdescribes in his entry onÂthe scopeÂ of the ZFS testing effort. **Reliability** Reliability . Unlike virtually every other filesystem thatÂ has come before it, ZFS is *designed* designed around unreliable hardware.Â This design-center means that ZFS can detect – and correct! – errorsÂ that other filesystems just silently propagate to the user. To get aÂ visceral feel for this, readÂ [Eric Lowe](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/elowe) Eric Lowe ’s entryÂ onÂ [ZFS saving the day](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/elowe#zfs_saves_the_day_ta) ZFS saving the day . Reading this entry will send a chill up yourÂ spine: Eric had a data-corrupting hardware problem thatÂ *he didn’t know he hadÂ until ZFS* he didn’t know he hadÂ until ZFS . How much data is being corrupted out there today becauseÂ pre-ZFS filesystems are too trusting of faulty hardware? More to theÂ point, how much of *your* your data is being corrupted today?Â Yeah – scary, ain’t it? And not only can ZFS detect hardware errors,Â in a mirrored configuration it can *correct* correct them.Â Fortunately, you don’t have to have bustedÂ hardware to see this: look atÂ [Tim Cook](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/timc) Tim Cook ’s entryÂ [demonstrating ZFS’s self-healing](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/timc#demonstrating_zfs_self_healing) demonstrating ZFS’s self-healing by using `dd` dd to simulateÂ date corruption.But if problems like Eric’s are all over the place, how is anyone’s data everÂ correct? The answer is pretty simple, if expensive: you pay forÂ reliability byÂ buyingÂ [over-priced hardware](http://www.emc.com/) over-priced hardware .Â That is, we’ve compensated for dumb software by having smart (and expensive)Â hardware. ZFS flips the economics on its head: smart software allowsÂ for stupid (and cheap) hardware – with ultra-high reliability.Â This is a profound shift; for more details on it check outÂ [Richard Elling](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/relling) Richard Elling ‘sÂ entry onÂ [the reliability of ZFS](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/relling#zfs_from_a_ras_point) the reliability of ZFS .ZFS is reliable by its architecture, but what of the implementation?Â As [Bill Moore](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/bill) Bill Moore writes,Â [testing ZFS was every bit as important as writing it](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/bill#zfs_and_the_all_singing) testing ZFS was every bit as important as writing it .Â And testing ZFS involved many people, asÂ [Jim Walker](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/jwalker) Jim Walker describes in his entry onÂ [the scopeÂ of the ZFS testing effort](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/jwalker#zfs_testing) the scopeÂ of the ZFS testing effort . * Performance. So fine: ZFS is a snap to administer, and it’sÂ ultra-reliable – but at what performance cost? The short answer is:Â none, really – and in fact, on many workloads, it rips.Â How can you have such features and still have great performance?Â Generally speaking, ZFS is able to deliverÂ great performance becauseit has more context, aÂ phenomenon thatÂBill Sommerfeldnotes is a consequence ofÂthe end-to-end principle.Â To see how this unlocks performance, look atÂBill Moore’s entryÂ onÂI/O scheduling; as Bill describes (and as I can personally attest to)Â ZFS ismuchsmarter about how it uses I/O devicesÂ than previous filesystems.Â For another architectural feature forÂ performance, look atÂNeil Perrin’s entryÂ ontheÂ ZFS intent log– and chase it withÂNeelakanth Nadgir‘sÂ entry taking you throughÂthe ZILÂ code.If you’re looking for some performance numbers,Â check outÂRoch Bourbonnais’s entryÂcomparing the performance of ZFS and UFS.Â Or letÂEric Kustarztake you to school, as you goÂ toÂFilesystems Performance 101: Disk Bandwidth,ÂFilesystems Performance 102: Filesystem Bandwidthand finallyÂ graduate toFilesystems Performance 201: When ZFS Attacks! Performance. So fine: ZFS is a snap to administer, and it’sÂ ultra-reliable – but at what performance cost? The short answer is:Â none, really – and in fact, on many workloads, it rips.Â How can you have such features and still have great performance?Â Generally speaking, ZFS is able to deliverÂ great performance becauseit has more context, aÂ phenomenon thatÂBill Sommerfeldnotes is a consequence ofÂthe end-to-end principle.Â To see how this unlocks performance, look atÂBill Moore’s entryÂ onÂI/O scheduling; as Bill describes (and as I can personally attest to)Â ZFS ismuchsmarter about how it uses I/O devicesÂ than previous filesystems.Â For another architectural feature forÂ performance, look atÂNeil Perrin’s entryÂ ontheÂ ZFS intent log– and chase it withÂNeelakanth Nadgir‘sÂ entry taking you throughÂthe ZILÂ code.If you’re looking for some performance numbers,Â check outÂRoch Bourbonnais’s entryÂcomparing the performance of ZFS and UFS.Â Or letÂEric Kustarztake you to school, as you goÂ toÂFilesystems Performance 101: Disk Bandwidth,ÂFilesystems Performance 102: Filesystem Bandwidthand finallyÂ graduate toFilesystems Performance 201: When ZFS Attacks! **Performance** Performance . So fine: ZFS is a snap to administer, and it’sÂ ultra-reliable – but at what performance cost? The short answer is:Â none, really – and in fact, on many workloads, it rips.Â How can you have such features and still have great performance?Â Generally speaking, ZFS is able to deliverÂ great performance because *it has more context* it has more context , aÂ phenomenon thatÂ [Bill Sommerfeld](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/sommerfeld) Bill Sommerfeld notes is a consequence ofÂ [the end-to-end principle](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/sommerfeld#the_end_to_end_argument) the end-to-end principle .Â To see how this unlocks performance, look atÂ [Bill Moore](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/bill) Bill Moore ’s entryÂ onÂ [I/O scheduling](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/bill#zfs_vs_the_benchmark) I/O scheduling ; as Bill describes (and as I can personally attest to)Â ZFS is *much* much smarter about how it uses I/O devicesÂ than previous filesystems.Â For another architectural feature forÂ performance, look atÂ [Neil Perrin](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/perrin) Neil Perrin ’s entryÂ on [theÂ ZFS intent log](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/perrin#the_lumberjack) theÂ ZFS intent log – and chase it withÂ [Neelakanth Nadgir](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/realneel) Neelakanth Nadgir ‘sÂ entry taking you throughÂ [the ZILÂ code](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/realneel#the_zfs_intent_log) the ZILÂ code .If you’re looking for some performance numbers,Â check outÂ [Roch Bourbonnais](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/roch) Roch Bourbonnais ’s entryÂ [comparing the performance of ZFS and UFS](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/roch#zfs_to_ufs_performance_comparison) comparing the performance of ZFS and UFS .Â Or letÂ [Eric Kustarz](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/erickustarz) Eric Kustarz take you to school, as you goÂ toÂ [Filesystems Performance 101: Disk Bandwidth](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/erickustarz?entry=fs_perf_101_disk_bw) Filesystems Performance 101: Disk Bandwidth ,Â [Filesystems Performance 102: Filesystem Bandwidth](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/erickustarz?entry=fs_perf_102_filesystem_bw) Filesystems Performance 102: Filesystem Bandwidth and finallyÂ graduate to [Filesystems Performance 201: When ZFS Attacks!](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/erickustarz?entry=fs_perf_201_postmark) Filesystems Performance 201: When ZFS Attacks! So given that ZFSisall that, when can we start forgetting about everyÂ other on-disk filesystem? For that, we’ll need to be able to boot offÂ ZFS. Bad news: this is hard. Good news:ÂTabriz Lemanand the rest of the ZFS Boot team are making great progress, asÂ Tabriz describes in her entry onÂbooting ZFS. Once we can boot ZFS – that is, once we canassumeZFS –Â all sorts of cool things become possible, asÂBart Smaaldersbrainstorms in his entry onÂthe impact of ZFS on Solaris. As Bart says, this is just theÂ beginning of the ZFS revolution… So given that ZFS *is* is all that, when can we start forgetting about everyÂ other on-disk filesystem? For that, we’ll need to be able to boot offÂ ZFS. Bad news: this is hard. Good news:Â [Tabriz Leman](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/tabriz) Tabriz Leman and the rest of the ZFS Boot team are making great progress, asÂ Tabriz describes in her entry onÂ [booting ZFS](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/tabriz?entry=zfs_boot) booting ZFS . Once we can boot ZFS – that is, once we can *assume* assume ZFS –Â all sorts of cool things become possible, asÂ [Bart Smaalders](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/barts) Bart Smaalders brainstorms in his entry onÂ [the impact of ZFS on Solaris](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/barts#some_thoughts_on_zfs_s) the impact of ZFS on Solaris . As Bart says, this is just theÂ beginning of the ZFS revolution… Finally, this has been a long, hard slog for the ZFS team.Â Anyone who has worked through “crunch time” on a big project willÂ see something of themselves inÂNoel Dellofano‘sÂ entry onÂthe final push.Â And any parent can empathize withÂSherry Moore‘sÂ entryÂcongratulating the team– and looking forward to havingÂher husbandonce again available to help with the kids.Â So congratulations to everyone on the ZFS team (andyour families!)Â – and for everyone else,Â welcome to ZFS! Finally, this has been a long, hard slog for the ZFS team.Â Anyone who has worked through “crunch time” on a big project willÂ see something of themselves inÂ [Noel Dellofano](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/dellofano) Noel Dellofano ‘sÂ entry onÂ [the final push](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/dellofano#late_night_zfs_fuel) the final push .Â And any parent can empathize withÂ [Sherry Moore](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/sherrym) Sherry Moore ‘sÂ entryÂ [congratulating the team](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/sherrym#congratulations) congratulating the team – and looking forward to havingÂ [her husband](http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/bill) her husband once again available to help with the kids.Â So congratulations to everyone on the ZFS team ( *and* and your families!)Â – and for everyone else,Â welcome to ZFS! Technorati tags:ÂOpenSolarisSolarisZFS Technorati tags:Â [OpenSolaris](http://technorati.com/tag/OpenSolaris) OpenSolaris [Solaris](http://technorati.com/tag/Solaris) Solaris [ZFS](http://technorati.com/tag/ZFS) ZFS
