---
title: "Announcing dtrace.conf"
date: 2007-12-18
url: https://bcantrill.dtrace.org/2007/12/18/announcing-dtrace.conf/
slug: announcing-dtrace.conf
word_count: 307
---

# Announcing dtrace.conf Announcing dtrace.conf Dec 18, 2007 We onTeam DTracehave realized that with so much going on in the world of DTrace – ports to new systems, providers for new languages and development of new DTrace-based tools – the time is long overdue for a DTrace summit of sorts. So I’m very pleased to announce our first-ever DTrace (un)conference:dtrace.conf(08), to be held in San Francisco on March 14, 2008. One of the most gratifying aspects of DTrace is its community: because DTrace operates both across abstraction boundaries and to great depth, it naturally attracts technologists who do the same – systems generalists who couple an ability to think abstractly about the system with a thirst for the concrete data necessary to better understand it. So if nothing else, dtrace.conf should provide for thought-provoking and wide-ranging conversation! We on [Team DTrace](http://www.flickr.com/photos/35034363287@N01/566408503/) Team DTrace have realized that with so much going on in the world of DTrace – ports to new systems, providers for new languages and development of new DTrace-based tools – the time is long overdue for a DTrace summit of sorts. So I’m very pleased to announce our first-ever DTrace (un)conference: **dtrace.conf(08)** [dtrace.conf(08)](http://wikis.sun.com/display/DTrace/dtrace.conf) dtrace.conf(08) , to be held in San Francisco on March 14, 2008. One of the most gratifying aspects of DTrace is its community: because DTrace operates both across abstraction boundaries and to great depth, it naturally attracts technologists who do the same – systems generalists who couple an ability to think abstractly about the system with a thirst for the concrete data necessary to better understand it. So if nothing else, dtrace.conf should provide for thought-provoking and wide-ranging conversation! Theconference wikihas more details; hope to see you atdtrace.confin San Francisco in March! The [conference wiki](http://wikis.sun.com/display/DTrace/dtrace.conf) conference wiki has more details; hope to see you at **dtrace.conf** dtrace.conf in San Francisco in March!
