---
title: "Boom/bust cycles"
date: 2007-12-05
url: https://bcantrill.dtrace.org/2007/12/05/boom/bust-cycles/
slug: bust-cycles
word_count: 670
---

# Boom/bust cycles Boom/bust cycles Dec 5, 2007 Growing up, I was sensitive to the boom/bust cycles endemic in particular industries: my grandfather was a petroleum engineer, and he saw the largest project of his career cancelled during the oil bust in the mid-1980s.1And growing up in Colorado, I saw not only the destruction wrought by the oil bust (1987 was very bleak in Denver), but also the long boom/bust history in the mining industries – unavoidable in towns likeLeadville. (Indeed, it was only after going to the East Coast for university that I came to appreciate that school children in the rest of the country don’t learn about theSilver Panic of 1893in such graphic detail.) Growing up, I was sensitive to the boom/bust cycles endemic in particular industries: my grandfather was a petroleum engineer, and he saw the largest project of his career cancelled during the oil bust in the mid-1980s. [1](#fn:1) 1 And growing up in Colorado, I saw not only the destruction wrought by the oil bust (1987 was very bleak in Denver), but also the long boom/bust history in the mining industries – unavoidable in towns like [Leadville](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leadville,_Colorado) Leadville . (Indeed, it was only after going to the East Coast for university that I came to appreciate that school children in the rest of the country don’t learn about the [Silver Panic of 1893](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Panic_of_1893) Silver Panic of 1893 in such graphic detail.) So when, in the early 1990s, I realized that my life’s calling was in software, I felt a sense of relief: here was an industry that was at last not shackled to the fickle Earth – an industry that was surely “bust-proof” at some level. Ha! As I learned (painfully, like most everyone else) in the Dot-Com boom and subsequent bust, booms and busts are – if anything – even more endemic in our industry. Companies grow from nothing to spectacular heights in virtually no time at all – and cancrash back into nothingness just as quickly. So when, in the early 1990s, I realized that my life’s calling was in software, I felt a sense of relief: here was an industry that was at last not shackled to the fickle Earth – an industry that was surely “bust-proof” at some level. Ha! As I learned (painfully, like most everyone else) in the Dot-Com boom and subsequent bust, booms and busts are – if anything – even more endemic in our industry. Companies grow from nothing to spectacular heights in virtually no time at all – and can [crash back into nothingness just as quickly](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boo.com) crash back into nothingness just as quickly . I bring up all of this, because if you haven’t seen it,this videois absolutely brilliant, capturing these endemic cycles perfectly (and hilariously), and imparting a surprising amount of wisdom besides. I bring up all of this, because if you haven’t seen it, [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I6IQ_FOCE6I) this video is absolutely brilliant, capturing these endemic cycles perfectly (and hilariously), and imparting a surprising amount of wisdom besides. I’ll still take our boom and bust cycles over those in other industries: there are, after all, still not quite yet software “ghost towns” – however close the old Excite@Home building on the 101 was getting beforeit was finally leased! I’ll still take our boom and bust cycles over those in other industries: there are, after all, still not quite yet software “ghost towns” – however close the old Excite@Home building on the 101 was getting before [it was finally leased](http://news-service.stanford.edu/news/2005/march2/med-hospital-030205.html) it was finally leased ! * If anyone is looking for an unspeakably large quantity of technical documentation on the (cancelled) ARAMCO al-Qasim refinery project, I have it waiting for your perusal!↩︎ If anyone is looking for an unspeakably large quantity of technical documentation on the (cancelled) ARAMCO al-Qasim refinery project, I have it waiting for your perusal!↩︎ If anyone is looking for an unspeakably large quantity of technical documentation on the (cancelled) ARAMCO al-Qasim refinery project, I have it waiting for your perusal! [↩︎](#fnref:1) ↩︎
