---
title: "On the beauty in Beautiful Code"
date: 2007-07-28
url: https://bcantrill.dtrace.org/2007/07/28/on-the-beauty-in-beautiful-code/
slug: on-the-beauty-in-beautiful-code
word_count: 1480
---

# On the beauty in Beautiful Code On the beauty in Beautiful Code Jul 28, 2007 I finishedBeautiful Codethis week, and have been reflectingÂ on the book and its development. In particular, I have thought back to some of the authors’ discussion,Â in which some advocated a different title. Many of usÂ were veryÂ strongly in favor of the working title of “Beautiful Code”, and I weighedÂ in with my specific views on the matter: I finished [Beautiful Code](http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/9780596510046/) *Beautiful Code* Beautiful Code this week, and have been reflectingÂ on the book and its development. In particular, I have thought back to some of the authors’ discussion,Â in which some advocated a different title. Many of usÂ were veryÂ strongly in favor of the working title of “Beautiful Code”, and I weighedÂ in with my specific views on the matter: ``` Date: Tue, 19 Sep 2006 16:18:22 -0700 From: Bryan Cantrill To: [Beautiful Code Co-Authors] Subject: Re: [Beautifulcode] reminder: outlines due by end of September Probably pointless to pile on here, but I'm for "Beautiful Code", if only because it appropriately expresses the nature of our craft. We suffer -- tremendously -- from a bias from traditional engineering that writing code is like digging a ditch: that it is a mundane activity best left to day labor -- and certainly beneath the Gentleman Engineer. This belief is profoundly wrong because software is not like a dam or a superhighway or a power plant: in software, the blueprints _are_ the thing; the abstraction _is_ the machine. It is long past time that our discipline stood on its feet, stepped out from the shadow of sooty 19th century disciplines, and embraced our unique confluence between mathematics and engineering. In short, "Beautiful Code" is long, long overdue. ``` Date: Tue, 19 Sep 2006 16:18:22 -0700 From: Bryan Cantrill To: [Beautiful Code Co-Authors] Subject: Re: [Beautifulcode] reminder: outlines due by end of September Probably pointless to pile on here, but I'm for "Beautiful Code", if only because it appropriately expresses the nature of our craft. We suffer -- tremendously -- from a bias from traditional engineering that writing code is like digging a ditch: that it is a mundane activity best left to day labor -- and certainly beneath the Gentleman Engineer. This belief is profoundly wrong because software is not like a dam or a superhighway or a power plant: in software, the blueprints _are_ the thing; the abstraction _is_ the machine. It is long past time that our discipline stood on its feet, stepped out from the shadow of sooty 19th century disciplines, and embraced our unique confluence between mathematics and engineering. In short, "Beautiful Code" is long, long overdue. Now, I don’t disagree with my reasoning from last September (thoughÂ I think that the Norma Rae-esque tone was probably taking it a bit too far), but having now read the book, I stand by the title for a very differentÂ reason: this book is so widely varied – there are so many divergent ideas here – thatonlythe most subjectiveÂ possible title could encompass them. That is, any term less subjective than “beautiful” would be willfully ignorant of the disagreements (ifÂ implicit) among the authors about what constitutes ideal software. Now, I don’t disagree with my reasoning from last September (thoughÂ I think that the Norma Rae-esque tone was probably taking it a bit too far), but having now read the book, I stand by the title for a very differentÂ reason: this book is so widely varied – there are so many divergent ideas here – that *only* only the most subjectiveÂ possible title could encompass them. That is, any term less subjective than “beautiful” would be willfully ignorant of the disagreements (ifÂ implicit) among the authors about what constitutes ideal software. To give an idea of what I’m talking about, here is the breakdown ofÂ languages and their representations in chapters: To give an idea of what I’m talking about, here is the breakdown ofÂ languages and their representations in chapters: **Language** Language **Chapters** Chapters C 11 Java 5 Scheme/Lisp 3 C++ 2 Fortran 2 Perl 2 Python 2 Ruby 2 C# 1 JavaScript 1 Haskell 1 VisualBASIC 1 (I’m only counting each chapter once, so for the very few chapters thatÂ included two languages, I took whatever appeared more frequently. Also,Â note that some chapters were about the implementation of one languageÂ feature in a different language – so for example, while there are two additionalÂ chapters on Python, both pertain more to the C-based implementation ofÂ those features than to their actual design or use in Python.) (I’m only counting each chapter once, so for the very few chapters thatÂ included two languages, I took whatever appeared more frequently. Also,Â note that some chapters were about the implementation of one languageÂ feature in a different language – so for example, while there are two additionalÂ chapters on Python, both pertain more to the C-based implementation ofÂ those features than to their actual design or use in Python.) Now, one could argue (and it would be an interesting argument) about howÂ much choice of language matters in software or, for that matter, in thought. AndÂ indeed, in some (if not many) of these chapters, the language ofÂ implementation is completely orthogonal to the idea being discussed. But I believe that languagedoesultimately affect thought,Â and it’s hard to imagine how one could have a sense of beauty that is so uncritical as to equally accommodate all of these languages. Now, one could argue (and it would be an interesting argument) about howÂ much choice of language matters in software or, for that matter, in thought. AndÂ indeed, in some (if not many) of these chapters, the language ofÂ implementation is completely orthogonal to the idea being discussed. But I believe that language *does* does ultimately affect thought,Â and it’s hard to imagine how one could have a sense of beauty that is so uncritical as to equally accommodate all of these languages. More specifically: read say, R. Kent Dybvig’s chapter onÂ the implementation ofsyntax-casein Scheme andÂ William Otte and Douglas Schmidt’s chapter on implementing aÂ distributed logging service using an object-oriented C++ framework. ItÂ seems unlikely to me that one personÂ will come away saying that both are beautiful to them. (And I’m not talkingÂ new-agey “beautiful to someone” kind of beautiful – I’m talking theÂ “I want to write code like that” kind of beautiful.)Â This is not meant to be a value judgement onÂ either of these chapters – just the observation that their definitionsÂ of beauty are (in my opinion, anyway) so wildly divergent as to beÂ nearly mutuallyÂ exclusive. And that’s why the title is perfect: both of these chaptersÂarebeautiful to their authors, and wecancome away sayingÂ “Hey, if it’s beautiful to you, then great.” More specifically: read say, R. Kent Dybvig’s chapter onÂ the implementation of `syntax-case` syntax-case in Scheme andÂ William Otte and Douglas Schmidt’s chapter on implementing aÂ distributed logging service using an object-oriented C++ framework. ItÂ seems unlikely to me that one personÂ will come away saying that both are beautiful to them. (And I’m not talkingÂ new-agey “beautiful to someone” kind of beautiful – I’m talking theÂ “I want to write code like that” kind of beautiful.)Â This is not meant to be a value judgement onÂ either of these chapters – just the observation that their definitionsÂ of beauty are (in my opinion, anyway) so wildly divergent as to beÂ nearly mutuallyÂ exclusive. And that’s why the title is perfect: both of these chaptersÂ *are* are beautiful to their authors, and we *can* can come away sayingÂ “Hey, if it’s beautiful to you, then great.” So I continue to strongly recommendBeautiful Code, but perhaps notÂ in the way thatÂ O’Reilly might intend: you should read this book not because it’sÂ cover-to-cover perfection, but rather to hone yourÂownsense of beauty. To that end, this is a book best readÂ concurrently with one’s peers: discussing (and arguing about) what isÂ beautiful, what isn’t beautiful, and why will help you discover andÂ refine your ownÂ voice in your code. And doing this will enable you to write the mostÂ important code of all: code that is, if nothing else, beautiful to you. So I continue to strongly recommend *Beautiful Code* Beautiful Code , but perhaps notÂ in the way thatÂ O’Reilly might intend: you should read this book not because it’sÂ cover-to-cover perfection, but rather to hone yourÂ *own* own sense of beauty. To that end, this is a book best readÂ concurrently with one’s peers: discussing (and arguing about) what isÂ beautiful, what isn’t beautiful, and why will help you discover andÂ refine your ownÂ voice in your code. And doing this will enable you to write the mostÂ important code of all: code that is, if nothing else, beautiful to you.
