---
title: "DTrace, node.js and the Robinson Projection"
date: 2010-08-30
url: https://bcantrill.dtrace.org/2010/08/30/dtrace-node.js-and-the-robinson-projection/
slug: dtrace-node.js-and-the-robinson-projection
word_count: 2200
---

# DTrace, node.js and the Robinson Projection DTrace, node.js and the Robinson Projection Aug 30, 2010 When I joined Joyent,I mentionedthat I was seeking to apply DTrace to the cloud, and that I was particularly excited about the development of node.js – leaving it implict that the intersection of the two technologies would be naturally interesting, As it turns out, we have had an early opportunity to show the potential here: as you might have seen, theNode Knockoutprogramming contest was held over the weekend; when I first joined Joyent (but four weeks ago!),Ryanwas very interested in potentially using DTrace to provide a leaderboard for the competition. I got to work, addingUSDT probes to node.js. To be fair, this still has some disabled overhead (namely, getting into and out of the node addon that has the true USDT probe), but it’s sufficiently modest to deploy DTrace-enabled node’s in production. When I joined Joyent, [I mentioned](http://dtrace.org/blogs/bmc/2010/07/30/hello-joyent/) I mentioned that I was seeking to apply DTrace to the cloud, and that I was particularly excited about the development of node.js – leaving it implict that the intersection of the two technologies would be naturally interesting, As it turns out, we have had an early opportunity to show the potential here: as you might have seen, the [Node Knockout](http://nodeknockout.com/) Node Knockout programming contest was held over the weekend; when I first joined Joyent (but four weeks ago!), [Ryan](http://twitter.com/ryah) Ryan was very interested in potentially using DTrace to provide a leaderboard for the competition. I got to work, adding [USDT probes to node.js](http://github.com/bcantrill/node-dtrace) USDT probes to node.js . To be fair, this still has some disabled overhead (namely, getting into and out of the node addon that has the true USDT probe), but it’s sufficiently modest to deploy DTrace-enabled node’s in production. And thanks to incredibly strong work by Joyent engineers, we were able to make available a newnode.js servicethat allocated a container per user. This service allowed us to make available a DTrace-enabled node to contestants – and then observe all of that from the global zone. And thanks to incredibly strong work by Joyent engineers, we were able to make available a new [node.js service](http://nodeknockout.posterous.com/countdown-to-knockout-post-11-deploying-to-jo) node.js service that allocated a container per user. This service allowed us to make available a DTrace-enabled node to contestants – and then observe all of that from the global zone. For example of the DTrace provider for node.js, here’s a simple enabling to print out HTTP requests as zones handle them (running on one of the Node Knockout machines): For example of the DTrace provider for node.js, here’s a simple enabling to print out HTTP requests as zones handle them (running on one of the Node Knockout machines): ``` # dtrace -n 'node*:::http-server-request{printf("%s: %s of %s\n", \ zonename, args[0]->method, args[0]->url)}' -q nodelay: GET of /poll6759.479651377309 nodelay: GET of /poll6148.392275444794 nodebodies: GET of /latest/ nodebodies: GET of /latest/ nodebodies: GET of /count/ nodebodies: GET of /count/ nodelay: GET of /poll8973.863890386003 nodelay: GET of /poll2097.9667574643568 awesometown: GET of /graphs/4c7a650eba12e9c41d000005.js awesometown: POST of /graphs/4c7a650eba12e9c41d000005/appendValue awesometown: GET of /graphs/4c7acd5ca121636840000002.js awesometown: GET of /graphs/4c7a650eba12e9c41d000005.js awesometown: GET of /graphs/4c7a650eba12e9c41d000005.js awesometown: GET of /graphs/4c7a650eba12e9c41d000005.js awesometown: GET of /graphs/4c7b2408546a64b81f000001.js awesometown: POST of /faye awesometown: POST of /faye ... ``` # dtrace -n 'node*:::http-server-request{printf("%s: %s of %s\n", \ zonename, args[0]->method, args[0]->url)}' -q nodelay: GET of /poll6759.479651377309 nodelay: GET of /poll6148.392275444794 nodebodies: GET of /latest/ nodebodies: GET of /latest/ nodebodies: GET of /count/ nodebodies: GET of /count/ nodelay: GET of /poll8973.863890386003 nodelay: GET of /poll2097.9667574643568 awesometown: GET of /graphs/4c7a650eba12e9c41d000005.js awesometown: POST of /graphs/4c7a650eba12e9c41d000005/appendValue awesometown: GET of /graphs/4c7acd5ca121636840000002.js awesometown: GET of /graphs/4c7a650eba12e9c41d000005.js awesometown: GET of /graphs/4c7a650eba12e9c41d000005.js awesometown: GET of /graphs/4c7a650eba12e9c41d000005.js awesometown: GET of /graphs/4c7b2408546a64b81f000001.js awesometown: POST of /faye awesometown: POST of /faye ... I added probes around both HTTP request and HTTP response; treating the file descriptor as a token that describes that uniquely describes that request while it is pending (an assumption that would only be invalid in the presence ofHTTP pipelining), allows one to actually determine the latency for requests: I added probes around both HTTP request and HTTP response; treating the file descriptor as a token that describes that uniquely describes that request while it is pending (an assumption that would only be invalid in the presence of [HTTP pipelining](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTTP_pipelining) HTTP pipelining ), allows one to actually determine the latency for requests: ``` # cat http.d #pragma D option quiet http-server-request { ts[this->fd = args[1]->fd] = timestamp; vts[this->fd] = vtimestamp; } http-server-response /this->ts = ts[this->fd = args[0]->fd]/ { @t[zonename] = quantize(timestamp - this->ts); @v[zonename] = quantize(vtimestamp - vts[this->fd]); ts[this->fd] = 0; vts[this->fd] = 0; } tick-1sec { printf("Wall time:\n"); printa(@t); printf("CPU time:\n"); printa(@v); } ``` # cat http.d #pragma D option quiet http-server-request { ts[this->fd = args[1]->fd] = timestamp; vts[this->fd] = vtimestamp; } http-server-response /this->ts = ts[this->fd = args[0]->fd]/ { @t[zonename] = quantize(timestamp - this->ts); @v[zonename] = quantize(vtimestamp - vts[this->fd]); ts[this->fd] = 0; vts[this->fd] = 0; } tick-1sec { printf("Wall time:\n"); printa(@t); printf("CPU time:\n"); printa(@v); } This script makes the distinction between wall time and CPU time; for wall-time, you can see the effect of long-polling, e.g. (the values are nanoseconds): This script makes the distinction between wall time and CPU time; for wall-time, you can see the effect of long-polling, e.g. (the values are nanoseconds): ``` nodelay value ------------- Distribution ------------- count 32768 | 0 65536 | 4 131072 |@@@@@ 52 262144 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ 183 524288 |@@@@@ 55 1048576 |@@@ 27 2097152 |@ 9 4194304 | 5 8388608 |@ 8 16777216 |@ 6 33554432 |@ 9 67108864 |@ 7 134217728 |@ 12 268435456 |@ 11 536870912 | 1 1073741824 | 4 2147483648 | 1 4294967296 | 5 8589934592 | 0 17179869184 | 1 34359738368 | 1 68719476736 | 0 ``` nodelay value ------------- Distribution ------------- count 32768 | 0 65536 | 4 131072 |@@@@@ 52 262144 |@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ 183 524288 |@@@@@ 55 1048576 |@@@ 27 2097152 |@ 9 4194304 | 5 8388608 |@ 8 16777216 |@ 6 33554432 |@ 9 67108864 |@ 7 134217728 |@ 12 268435456 |@ 11 536870912 | 1 1073741824 | 4 2147483648 | 1 4294967296 | 5 8589934592 | 0 17179869184 | 1 34359738368 | 1 68719476736 | 0 You can also look at the CPU time to see those that are doing more actual work. For example, one zone with interesting CPU time outliiers: You can also look at the CPU time to see those that are doing more actual work. For example, one zone with interesting CPU time outliiers: ``` nodebodies value ------------- Distribution ------------- count 4194304 | 0 8388608 |@@@@@@@@@@@@ 57 16777216 |@@@@ 21 33554432 |@@@@ 18 67108864 |@@@@@@@ 34 134217728 |@@@@@@@@@@@ 54 268435456 | 0 536870912 | 0 1073741824 | 0 2147483648 | 0 4294967296 |@ 3 8589934592 |@ 4 17179869184 | 0 ``` nodebodies value ------------- Distribution ------------- count 4194304 | 0 8388608 |@@@@@@@@@@@@ 57 16777216 |@@@@ 21 33554432 |@@@@ 18 67108864 |@@@@@@@ 34 134217728 |@@@@@@@@@@@ 54 268435456 | 0 536870912 | 0 1073741824 | 0 2147483648 | 0 4294967296 |@ 3 8589934592 |@ 4 17179869184 | 0 Note that because node has a single thread do all processing, we cannot assume that the requests themselves are inducing the work – only that CPU work was done between request and response. Still, this data would probably be interesting to thenodebodiesteam… Note that because node has a single thread do all processing, we cannot assume that the requests themselves are inducing the work – only that CPU work was done between request and response. Still, this data would probably be interesting to the [nodebodies](http://nodebodies.no.de) nodebodies team… I also added probes around connection establishment; so here’s a simple way of looking at new connections by zone: I also added probes around connection establishment; so here’s a simple way of looking at new connections by zone: ``` # dtrace -n 'node*:::net-server-connection{@[zonename] = count()}' dtrace: description 'node*:::net-server-connection' matched 44 probes ^C explorer-sox 1 nodebodies 1 anansi 69 nodelay 102 awesometown 146 ``` # dtrace -n 'node*:::net-server-connection{@[zonename] = count()}' dtrace: description 'node*:::net-server-connection' matched 44 probes ^C explorer-sox 1 nodebodies 1 anansi 69 nodelay 102 awesometown 146 Or if we wanted to see which IP addresses were connecting to, say, our good friends atawesometown(with actual addresses in the output elided): Or if we wanted to see which IP addresses were connecting to, say, our good friends at [awesometown](http://awesometown.no.de) awesometown (with actual addresses in the output elided): ``` # dtrace -n 'node*:::net-server-connection \ /zonename == "awesometown"/{@[args[0]->remoteAddress] = count()}' dtrace: description 'node*:::net-server-connection' matched 44 probes XXX.XXX.XXX.XXX 1 XX.XXX.XX.XXX 1 XX.XXX.XXX.XXX 1 XX.XXX.XXX.XX 1 XXX.XXX.XX.XXX 1 XXX.XXX.XX.XX 2 XXX.XXX.XXX.XX 8 ``` # dtrace -n 'node*:::net-server-connection \ /zonename == "awesometown"/{@[args[0]->remoteAddress] = count()}' dtrace: description 'node*:::net-server-connection' matched 44 probes XXX.XXX.XXX.XXX 1 XX.XXX.XX.XXX 1 XX.XXX.XXX.XXX 1 XX.XXX.XXX.XX 1 XXX.XXX.XX.XXX 1 XXX.XXX.XX.XX 2 XXX.XXX.XXX.XX 8 Ryan saw the DTrace support I had added, and had a great idea: what if we took the IPs of incoming connections and geolocated them, throwing them on a world map and coloring them by team name? This was an idea that was just too exciting not to take a swing at, so we got to work. For the backend, the machinery was begging to itself be written in node, so I did alibdtrace addonfor node and started building a scalable backend for processing the DTrace data from the different Node Knockout machines. Meanwhile,Jonicame up with some mockups that had everyone drooling, andMarkcontactedBrianfromNitobiabout working on the front-end. Brian and crew were as excited about it as we were, and they put front-end engineer extraordinaireYoheion the case – who worked withRobon the Joyent side to pull it all together. Among Rob’s other feats, he managed to implement in JavaScript the logic for plotting longitude and latitude in the beautifulRobinson projection– which is a brutally complicated transformation. It was an incredible team, and we were pulling it off in such a short period of time and with such a firm deadline that we often felt like contestants ourselves! Ryan saw the DTrace support I had added, and had a great idea: what if we took the IPs of incoming connections and geolocated them, throwing them on a world map and coloring them by team name? This was an idea that was just too exciting not to take a swing at, so we got to work. For the backend, the machinery was begging to itself be written in node, so I did a [libdtrace addon](http://github.com/bcantrill/node-libdtrace) libdtrace addon for node and started building a scalable backend for processing the DTrace data from the different Node Knockout machines. Meanwhile, [Joni](http://twitter.com/jahoni) Joni came up with some mockups that had everyone drooling, and [Mark](http://twitter.com/mmayo) Mark contacted [Brian](http://twitter.com/brianleroux) Brian from [Nitobi](http://nitobi.com/) Nitobi about working on the front-end. Brian and crew were as excited about it as we were, and they put front-end engineer extraordinaire [Yohei](http://twitter.com/yoheis) Yohei on the case – who worked with [Rob](http://twitter.com/rob_ellis) Rob on the Joyent side to pull it all together. Among Rob’s other feats, he managed to implement in JavaScript the logic for plotting longitude and latitude in the beautiful [Robinson projection](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robinson_projection) Robinson projection – which is a brutally complicated transformation. It was an incredible team, and we were pulling it off in such a short period of time and with such a firm deadline that we often felt like contestants ourselves! The result – which it must be said works best in Safari and Chrome – is athttp://leaderboard.no.de. In keeping with both the spirit of node and DTrace, the leaderboard is updated in real-time; from the time you connect to one of the Joyent-hostest (no.de) contestants, you should see yourself show up in the map in no more than 700 milliseconds (plus your network latwork latency). For crowded areas like the Bay Area, it can be hard to see yourself – but try moving to Cameroon for best results. It’s fun to watch as certain contestants go viral (try both hovering over a particular data point and clicking on the team name in the leaderboard) – and you can know which continent you’re cursing at inhttp://saber-tooth-moose-lion.no.de(now known to the world asSwarmation). The result – which it must be said works best in Safari and Chrome – is at [http://leaderboard.no.de](http://leaderboard.no.de) http://leaderboard.no.de . In keeping with both the spirit of node and DTrace, the leaderboard is updated in real-time; from the time you connect to one of the Joyent-hostest (no.de) contestants, you should see yourself show up in the map in no more than 700 milliseconds (plus your network latwork latency). For crowded areas like the Bay Area, it can be hard to see yourself – but try moving to Cameroon for best results. It’s fun to watch as certain contestants go viral (try both hovering over a particular data point and clicking on the team name in the leaderboard) – and you can know which continent you’re cursing at in [http://saber-tooth-moose-lion.no.de](http://saber-tooth-moose-lion.no.de) http://saber-tooth-moose-lion.no.de (now known to the world as [Swarmation](http://swarmation.com/) Swarmation ). Enjoy both the leaderboard and the terrific Node Knockout entries (be sure to vote for your favorites!) – and know that we’ve only scratched the surface of what DTrace and node.js can do together! Enjoy both the leaderboard and the terrific Node Knockout entries (be sure to vote for your favorites!) – and know that we’ve only scratched the surface of what DTrace and node.js can do together!
