---
title: "RIP Khaled Bichara, 1971-2020"
date: 2020-02-03
url: https://bcantrill.dtrace.org/2020/02/03/rip-khaled-bichara-1971-2020/
slug: rip-khaled-bichara-1971-2020
word_count: 413
---

# RIP Khaled Bichara, 1971-2020 RIP Khaled Bichara, 1971-2020 Feb 3, 2020 We were deeply saddened to learn thatKhaled Bichara, one of Oxide’s angel investors,died in a car accident in Cairo on Friday night. We were deeply saddened to learn that [Khaled Bichara](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khaled_Bichara) Khaled Bichara , one of Oxide’s angel investors, [died in a car accident in Cairo on Friday night](https://www.menabytes.com/khaled-bichara-dies-car-accident/) died in a car accident in Cairo on Friday night . Those of us who have known Khaled for years have known him to be a bold investor who appreciated hard technical problems – and also a profoundly decent person, who cared deeply for his family, his companies, and his country. Khaled’s stories of kindling entrepreneurship in Egypt were inspiring to any who heard them – and served as a reminder of the reponsibility that we all have to our broader communities. Our most recent conversation with Khaled – just a few short months ago – remains vivid: he was excited by our technical vision and thrilled to be a part of Oxide. For our part, we were looking forward to a long journey together, and to making good on his belief in us; we are gutted to have lost him so abruptly. Our heart goes out to his family, and to all those who he touched over his career; Silicon Valley may be a long way from Cairo, but his impact andlegacywill be felt here for years to come. Those of us who have known Khaled for years have known him to be a bold investor who appreciated hard technical problems – and also a profoundly decent person, who cared deeply for his family, his companies, and his country. Khaled’s stories of kindling entrepreneurship in Egypt were inspiring to any who heard them – and served as a reminder of the reponsibility that we all have to our broader communities. Our most recent conversation with Khaled – just a few short months ago – remains vivid: he was excited by our technical vision and thrilled to be a part of Oxide. For our part, we were looking forward to a long journey together, and to making good on his belief in us; we are gutted to have lost him so abruptly. Our heart goes out to his family, and to all those who he touched over his career; Silicon Valley may be a long way from Cairo, but his impact and [legacy](https://waya.media/the-legacy-of-khaled-bichara/) legacy will be felt here for years to come.
