---
title: "dtrace.conf(24)"
date: 2024-12-05
url: https://bcantrill.dtrace.org/2024/12/05/dtrace.conf24/
slug: dtrace.conf24
word_count: 2632
---

# dtrace.conf(24) dtrace.conf(24) Dec 5, 2024 Sometime in late 2007, we had the idea of a DTrace conference. Or really, more of a meetup; from the primordial e-mail I sent: Sometime in late 2007, we had the idea of a DTrace conference. Or really, more of a meetup; from the primordial e-mail I sent: > The goal here, by the way, is not a DTrace user group, but more of a > face-to-face meeting with people actively involved in DTraceГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүeither by > porting it to another system, by integrating probes into higher level > environments, by building higher-level tools on top of DTrace or by using it > heavily and/or in a critical role. That said, we also donГўВҖВҷt want to be > exclusionary, so our thinking is that the only true requirement for attending > is that everyone must be prepared to speak informally for 15 mins or so on > what they are doing with DTrace, any limitations that they have encountered, > and some ideas for the future. WeГўВҖВҷre thinking that this is going to be on > the order of 15-30 people (though more would be a good problem to haveГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүweГўВҖВҷll track it if necessary), that it will be one full day (breakfast in the > morning through drinks into the evening), and that weГўВҖВҷre going to host it > here at our offices in San Francisco sometime in March 2008. The goal here, by the way, is not a DTrace user group, but more of a face-to-face meeting with people actively involved in DTraceГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүeither by porting it to another system, by integrating probes into higher level environments, by building higher-level tools on top of DTrace or by using it heavily and/or in a critical role. That said, we also donГўВҖВҷt want to be exclusionary, so our thinking is that the only true requirement for attending is that everyone must be prepared to speak informally for 15 mins or so on what they are doing with DTrace, any limitations that they have encountered, and some ideas for the future. WeГўВҖВҷre thinking that this is going to be on the order of 15-30 people (though more would be a good problem to haveГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүweГўВҖВҷll track it if necessary), that it will be one full day (breakfast in the morning through drinks into the evening), and that weГўВҖВҷre going to host it here at our offices in San Francisco sometime in March 2008. The goal here, by the way, is not a DTrace user group, but more of a face-to-face meeting with people actively involved in DTraceГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүeither by porting it to another system, by integrating probes into higher level environments, by building higher-level tools on top of DTrace or by using it heavily and/or in a critical role. That said, we also donГўВҖВҷt want to be exclusionary, so our thinking is that the only true requirement for attending is that everyone must be prepared to speak informally for 15 mins or so on what they are doing with DTrace, any limitations that they have encountered, and some ideas for the future. WeГўВҖВҷre thinking that this is going to be on the order of 15-30 people (though more would be a good problem to haveГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүweГўВҖВҷll track it if necessary), that it will be one full day (breakfast in the morning through drinks into the evening), and that weГўВҖВҷre going to host it here at our offices in San Francisco sometime in March 2008. This same note also included some suggested names for the gathering, including what in hindsight seems a clear winner:DTrace Bi-Mon-Sci-Fi-Con. As if knowing that I should leave an explanatory note to my future self as to why this name was not selected, my past self fortunately clarified: "before everyone clamors for the obvious Bi-Mon-Sci-Fi-Con, you should know that most Millennials donГўВҖВҷt (sadly) get the reference." (While I disagree with the judgement of my past self, it at least indicates that at some point I cared if anyone got the reference.) This same note also included some suggested names for the gathering, including what in hindsight seems a clear winner: [DTrace Bi-Mon-Sci-Fi-Con](images/bi-mon-sci-fi-con.gif) DTrace Bi-Mon-Sci-Fi-Con . As if knowing that I should leave an explanatory note to my future self as to why this name was not selected, my past self fortunately clarified: "before everyone clamors for the obvious Bi-Mon-Sci-Fi-Con, you should know that most Millennials donГўВҖВҷt (sadly) get the reference." (While I disagree with the judgement of my past self, it at least indicates that at some point I cared if anyone got the reference.) We settled on amuch more obscure reference, and hadthe first dtrace.conf in March 2008. Befitting the style of the time, it was anunconference(a term that may well have hit its apogee in 2008) that you signed up to attend byediting a wiki. More surprising given the year (and thanks entirely to attendee Ben Rockwood), it was recordedГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүthough this is so long ago thatI referred to it as video taping(and with none of the participants micГўВҖВҷd, IГўВҖВҷm afraid the quality isnГўВҖВҷt very good). The conference, however, was terrific, viz. the reports ofAdam,KeithandStephen(all somehow still online nearly two decades later). If anything, it was a littletoogood:we realized that we couldnГўВҖВҷt recreate the magic, and we demurred on making it an annual event. We settled on a [much more obscure reference](https://illumos.org/books/dtrace/chp-anon.html#chp-anon) much more obscure reference , and had [the first dtrace.conf in March 2008](https://bcantrill.dtrace.org/2008/03/16/dtrace.conf08/) the first dtrace.conf in March 2008 . Befitting the style of the time, it was an [unconference](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unconference) unconference (a term that may well have hit its apogee in 2008) that you signed up to attend by [editing a wiki](images/wiki.jpg) editing a wiki . More surprising given the year (and thanks entirely to attendee Ben Rockwood), it was recordedГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүthough this is so long ago that [I referred to it as video taping](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FZ4Z22AGj5s#t=38s) I referred to it as video taping (and with none of the participants micГўВҖВҷd, IГўВҖВҷm afraid the quality isnГўВҖВҷt very good). The conference, however, was terrific, viz. the reports of [Adam](https://ahl.dtrace.org/2008/05/05/dtrace-conf-post-post-mortem/) Adam , [Keith](https://x86vmm.blogspot.com/2008/03/dtraceconf08.html) Keith and [Stephen](https://redmonk.com/sogrady/2008/03/16/dtraceconf-and-the-dumbest-guy-in-the-room/) Stephen (all somehow still online nearly two decades later). If anything, it was a little *too* too good: [we realized that we couldnГўВҖВҷt recreate the magic](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2PU0WkMJNGU#t=4m0s) we realized that we couldnГўВҖВҷt recreate the magic , and we demurred on making it an annual event. Years passed, and memories faded. By 2012, it felt like we wanted to get folks together again, now under a post-lawnmower corporate aegis in Joyent. The resultingdtrace.conf(12)was a success, and the Olympiad cadence felt like the right one; we did it again four years later atdtrace.conf(16). Years passed, and memories faded. By 2012, it felt like we wanted to get folks together again, now under a post-lawnmower corporate aegis in Joyent. The resulting [dtrace.conf(12)](https://ahl.dtrace.org/2012/04/09/dtrace-conf12-wrap-up/) dtrace.conf(12) was a success, and the Olympiad cadence felt like the right one; we did it again four years later at [dtrace.conf(16)](https://bcantrill.dtrace.org/2016/07/29/dtrace-conf16-wrap-up/) dtrace.conf(16) . In 2020, we came back together fora new adventureГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүand the DTrace Olympiad wasnot lost on Adam. Alas, dtrace.conf(20)ГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүlike the Olympics themselvesГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүwas cancelled, if implicitly. Unlike the Olympics, however, it was not to be rescheduled. In 2020, we came back together for [a new adventure](https://bcantrill.dtrace.org/2019/12/02/the-soul-of-a-new-computer-company/) a new adventure ГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүand the DTrace Olympiad was [not lost on Adam](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IeUFzBBRilM#t=1h30m36s) not lost on Adam . Alas, dtrace.conf(20)ГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүlike the Olympics themselvesГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүwas cancelled, if implicitly. Unlike the Olympics, however, it was not to be rescheduled. More years passed and DTrace continued to prove its utility at Oxide; last year when Adam and I did our"DTrace at 20" episode ofOxide and Friends, we vowed to hold dtrace.conf(24)ГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүand a few months ago, we set our date to be December 11th. More years passed and DTrace continued to prove its utility at Oxide; last year when Adam and I did our ["DTrace at 20" episode ofOxide and Friends](https://oxide-and-friends.transistor.fm/episodes/dtrace-at-20) "DTrace at 20" episode of *Oxide and Friends* Oxide and Friends , we vowed to hold dtrace.conf(24)ГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүand a few months ago, we set our date to be December 11th. At first we assumed we would do something similar to our earlier conferences: a one-day participant-run conference, at the Oxide office in Emeryville. But times have changed: thanks tothe rise of remote work, technologists are much more dispersedГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүand many more people would need to travel for dtrace.conf(24) than in previous DTrace Olympiads. Travel hasnГўВҖВҷt become any cheaper since 2008, and the cost (and inconvenience) was clearly going to limit attendance. At first we assumed we would do something similar to our earlier conferences: a one-day participant-run conference, at the Oxide office in Emeryville. But times have changed: thanks to [the rise of remote work](https://oxide-and-friends.transistor.fm/episodes/the-future-of-work-2022-03-07) the rise of remote work , technologists are much more dispersedГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүand many more people would need to travel for dtrace.conf(24) than in previous DTrace Olympiads. Travel hasnГўВҖВҷt become any cheaper since 2008, and the cost (and inconvenience) was clearly going to limit attendance. The dilemma for our small meetup highlights the changing dynamics in tech conferences in general: with talks all recorded and made publicly available after the conference, how does one justify attending a conference in person? There can be reasonable answers to that question, of course: it may be the hallway track, or the expo hall, or the after-hours socializing, or perhaps some otherspecial conference experience. But itГўВҖВҷs also not surprising that some conferencesГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүespecially ones really focused on technical contentГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүhave decided that they are better off doing asconference giant OГўВҖВҷReilly Media did, and going exclusively online. And without the need to feed and shelter participants, the logistics for running a conference become much more tenableГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүand the price point can be lowered to the point that even highly produced conferences likeP99 CONFcan be made freely available. This, in turn, leads to much greater attendanceГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүand a network effect that can get back some of what one might lose going online. In particular, using chat as the hallway track can be more much effective (and is certainly more scalable!) than theactualphysical hallways at a conference. The dilemma for our small meetup highlights the changing dynamics in tech conferences in general: with talks all recorded and made publicly available after the conference, how does one justify attending a conference in person? There can be reasonable answers to that question, of course: it may be the hallway track, or the expo hall, or the after-hours socializing, or perhaps some other [special conference experience](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oHeqakyWQT0) special conference experience . But itГўВҖВҷs also not surprising that some conferencesГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүespecially ones really focused on technical contentГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүhave decided that they are better off doing as [conference giant OГўВҖВҷReilly Media did](https://www.oreilly.com/conferences/) conference giant OГўВҖВҷReilly Media did , and going exclusively online. And without the need to feed and shelter participants, the logistics for running a conference become much more tenableГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүand the price point can be lowered to the point that even highly produced conferences like [P99 CONF](https://www.p99conf.io/) P99 CONF can be made freely available. This, in turn, leads to much greater attendanceГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүand a network effect that can get back some of what one might lose going online. In particular, using chat as the hallway track can be more much effective (and is certainly more scalable!) than the **actual** actual physical hallways at a conference. For conferences in general, there is a conversation to be had here (and as a teaser, Adam and I are going totalk about it with Stephen OГўВҖВҷGrady and Theo Schlossnagle onOxide and Friendsnext week, but for our quirky, one-day, Olympiad-cadence dtrace.conf, the decision was pretty easy: there was much more to be gained than lost by going exclusively on-line. For conferences in general, there is a conversation to be had here (and as a teaser, Adam and I are going to [talk about it with Stephen OГўВҖВҷGrady and Theo Schlossnagle onOxide and Friendsnext week](https://discord.gg/QrcKGTTPrF?event=1313157996645322784) talk about it with Stephen OГўВҖВҷGrady and Theo Schlossnagle on *Oxide and Friends* Oxide and Friends next week , but for our quirky, one-day, Olympiad-cadence dtrace.conf, the decision was pretty easy: there was much more to be gained than lost by going exclusively on-line. So dtrace.conf(24) is coming up next week, anditГўВҖВҷs available to everyone. In terms of platform, weГўВҖВҷre going to try to keep that pretty simple: weГўВҖВҷre going to use Google Meet for the actual presenters, which we will stream in real-time to YouTubeГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүand weГўВҖВҷll usethe Oxide Discordfor all chat. WeГўВҖВҷre hoping youГўВҖВҷll join us on December 11thГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүand if you want to talk about DTrace or a DTrace-adjacent topic, weГўВҖВҷd love for you to present! Keeping to the unconference style, if you would like to present, please indicate your topic inthe #session-topics Discord channelso we can get the agenda fleshed out. So dtrace.conf(24) is coming up next week, and [itГўВҖВҷs available to everyone](https://www.eventbrite.com/e/dtraceconf24-tickets-1044402936297?aff=oddtdtcreator) itГўВҖВҷs available to everyone . In terms of platform, weГўВҖВҷre going to try to keep that pretty simple: weГўВҖВҷre going to use Google Meet for the actual presenters, which we will stream in real-time to YouTubeГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүand weГўВҖВҷll use [the Oxide Discord](https://discord.gg/QrcKGTTPrF?event=1313617352541208747) the Oxide Discord for all chat. WeГўВҖВҷre hoping youГўВҖВҷll join us on December 11thГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүand if you want to talk about DTrace or a DTrace-adjacent topic, weГўВҖВҷd love for you to present! Keeping to the unconference style, if you would like to present, please indicate your topic in [the #session-topics Discord channel](https://discord.gg/tTECbxDf88) the #session-topics Discord channel so we can get the agenda fleshed out. While weГўВҖВҷre excited to be online, therearesome historical accoutrements of conferences that we didnГўВҖВҷt want to give up. First, we have a tradition of t-shirts with dtrace.conf. Thanks to our designerBen Leonard, we havea banger of a t-shirt, capturing the spirit of our original dtrace.conf(08) shirt but with an Oxide twist. ItГўВҖВҷs (obviously) harder to make those free but we have tried to price them reasonably. You can get your t-shirt by adding it to your (free)dtrace.conf ticket. (And for those who present at dtrace.conf, your shirt is on usГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүweГўВҖВҷll send you a coupon code!) While weГўВҖВҷre excited to be online, there **are** are some historical accoutrements of conferences that we didnГўВҖВҷt want to give up. First, we have a tradition of t-shirts with dtrace.conf. Thanks to our designer [Ben Leonard](https://bsky.app/profile/benleonard.bsky.social) Ben Leonard , we have [a banger of a t-shirt](images/dtrace-conf24-shirt.png) a banger of a t-shirt , capturing the spirit of our original dtrace.conf(08) shirt but with an Oxide twist. ItГўВҖВҷs (obviously) harder to make those free but we have tried to price them reasonably. You can get your t-shirt by adding it to your (free) [dtrace.conf ticket](https://www.eventbrite.com/e/dtraceconf24-tickets-1044402936297?aff=oddtdtcreator) dtrace.conf ticket . (And for those who present at dtrace.conf, your shirt is on usГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүweГўВҖВҷll send you a coupon code!) Second, for those who can make their way to the East Bay and want some hangout time, we are going to have an aprГғВЁs conference social event at the Oxide office starting at 5p. WeГўВҖВҷre charging something nominal for that too (and like the t-shirt, you pay for that via yourdtrace.conf ticket); weГўВҖВҷll have some food and drinks and an Oxide hardware tour for the curiousГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүand (of course?) there will beFishpong. Second, for those who can make their way to the East Bay and want some hangout time, we are going to have an aprГғВЁs conference social event at the Oxide office starting at 5p. WeГўВҖВҷre charging something nominal for that too (and like the t-shirt, you pay for that via your [dtrace.conf ticket](https://www.eventbrite.com/e/dtraceconf24-tickets-1044402936297?aff=oddtdtcreator) dtrace.conf ticket ); weГўВҖВҷll have some food and drinks and an Oxide hardware tour for the curiousГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүand (of course?) there will be [Fishpong](https://github.com/fishpong/docs/wiki/Primer) Fishpong . Much has changed since I sent that e-mail 17 years agoГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүbut the shared values and disposition that brought together our small community continue to endure; we look forward to seeing everyone (virtually) at dtrace.conf(24)! Much has changed since I sent that e-mail 17 years agoГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүbut the shared values and disposition that brought together our small community continue to endure; we look forward to seeing everyone (virtually) at dtrace.conf(24)!
