---
title: "Blogging through the decades"
date: 2024-11-16
url: https://bcantrill.dtrace.org/2024/11/16/blogging-through-the-decades/
slug: blogging-through-the-decades
word_count: 3575
---

# Blogging through the decades Blogging through the decades Nov 16, 2024 Over the summer, I hit an anniversary of sorts: I’ve been blogging for two decades (!). For reasons I’ll get to, I’ve been reflecting back on my history of writing in general and blogging in particular. Over the summer, I hit an anniversary of sorts: I’ve been blogging for two decades (!). For reasons I’ll get to, I’ve been reflecting back on my history of writing in general and blogging in particular. In 2004, blogging wasn’t exactly new (it had been around in one form or another for as long as a decade), but it also wasn’t something that I was actively engaged in. And while there was some blogging infrastructure at Sun, it was desultory and oriented around Java. Similarly, while there were also vectors for engineers to directly engage with customers, they were limited to proprietary forums, with very specific topics (e.g., support issues) and generally inaccessible and undiscoverable. All of that changed in the spring, when Sun rolled outa new policy on discourseand then – a few months later –blogs.sun.com. AsTim Bray retold, the disposition with respect to blogging was purposeful: employees weren’t merelyallowedto blog, they wereactively encouragedto do so – and provided all of the infrastructure to make it easy. The message was clear, and it was explicit: “We trust you.” In 2004, blogging wasn’t exactly new (it had been around in one form or another for as long as a decade), but it also wasn’t something that I was actively engaged in. And while there was some blogging infrastructure at Sun, it was desultory and oriented around Java. Similarly, while there were also vectors for engineers to directly engage with customers, they were limited to proprietary forums, with very specific topics (e.g., support issues) and generally inaccessible and undiscoverable. All of that changed in the spring, when Sun rolled out [a new policy on discourse](https://www.tbray.org/ongoing/When/200x/2004/05/02/Policy) a new policy on discourse and then – a few months later – [blogs.sun.com](https://www.tbray.org/ongoing/When/200x/2004/06/06/BSC) blogs.sun.com . As [Tim Bray retold](https://www.tbray.org/ongoing/When/200x/2004/05/02/PolicyMaking) Tim Bray retold , the disposition with respect to blogging was purposeful: employees weren’t merely *allowed* allowed to blog, they were *actively encouraged* actively encouraged to do so – and provided all of the infrastructure to make it easy. The message was clear, and it was explicit: “We trust you.” That trust – Sun’s finest quality! – was not new for the company; I came to work at SunbecauseI had seen an engineer (Jeff Bonwick) talk about their work (oncomp.unix.solaris!), and I needed no convincing on the merits of technologist transparency. But wasn’t blogging just a little too… trendy? I quickly got over myself: we had a lot to talk about – DTrace had integrated in the fall of 2003 – and blogging felt like it was worth a shot. On June 14, 2004,I took the plunge. As it would bewith Twitter Spaces many years later, it was immediately obvious that any reticence I might have had was misplaced – that blogging was larger than the sum of its parts. As I would describe to folks internally, the beauty of blogging is that you needn’t be regular and you also needn’t be on topic: you can writeonlywhen you have something to say – and you can say whatever you want. That trust – Sun’s finest quality! – was not new for the company; I came to work at Sun *because* because I had seen an engineer (Jeff Bonwick) talk about their work (on [comp.unix.solaris](https://groups.google.com/g/comp.unix.solaris/c/e2C6JIxPHfA/m/rq7XBHY4P74J) comp.unix.solaris !), and I needed no convincing on the merits of technologist transparency. But wasn’t blogging just a little too… trendy? I quickly got over myself: we had a lot to talk about – DTrace had integrated in the fall of 2003 – and blogging felt like it was worth a shot. On June 14, 2004, [I took the plunge](/2004/06/14/some-prehistory/) I took the plunge . As it would be [with Twitter Spaces many years later](/2021/05/02/twitter-spaces-a-few-weeks-in/) with Twitter Spaces many years later , it was immediately obvious that any reticence I might have had was misplaced – that blogging was larger than the sum of its parts. As I would describe to folks internally, the beauty of blogging is that you needn’t be regular and you also needn’t be on topic: you can write *only* only when you have something to say – and you can say whatever you want. Blogging at Sun was emblematic of a larger trend: the company that had invented open systems was in the process of reimagining itself in a new era of transparency and collaboration, as exemplified with the announced intention of open sourcing Solaris. While it had been announced earlier in 2004, open sourcing a complicated proprietary system like Solaris isdeceptively tricky, and it was taking us a while to get all of the details right. Blogging was a perfect complement to our open sourcing activity; I blogged whenDTrace went first in the chute– and when we ultimately open sourced the rest of the operating system later in 2005, we launched it byencouraging engineers to blog about it. When ZFS integrated into the system later that year, we marked the occasion withanother flurry of blog entries. Thanks to blogging, we created an extraordinary amount of dense, technical content – and all in the voice of the technologists themselves. Blogging at Sun was emblematic of a larger trend: the company that had invented open systems was in the process of reimagining itself in a new era of transparency and collaboration, as exemplified with the announced intention of open sourcing Solaris. While it had been announced earlier in 2004, open sourcing a complicated proprietary system like Solaris is [deceptively tricky](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zpnncakrelk#t=11m12s) deceptively tricky , and it was taking us a while to get all of the details right. Blogging was a perfect complement to our open sourcing activity; I blogged when [DTrace went first in the chute](/2005/01/25/solaris-10-revealed/) DTrace went first in the chute – and when we ultimately open sourced the rest of the operating system later in 2005, we launched it by [encouraging engineers to blog about it](/2005/06/15/sifting-through-the-blogs.../) encouraging engineers to blog about it . When ZFS integrated into the system later that year, we marked the occasion with [another flurry of blog entries](/2005/11/16/welcome-to-zfs/) another flurry of blog entries . Thanks to blogging, we created an extraordinary amount of dense, technical content – and all in the voice of the technologists themselves. The years went by, and asTim Bray reflected back in 2007, blogging at Sun was essentially without downside. While I absolutely agree, it’s hard for me not to be a little bittersweet about that fifteen years later: there wassomuch great content that the only downside – such as it was – was that it was shackled to a listing corporate vessel. And when that vessel sank, much of the content went to a watery grave (or would have, had it not been for the heroics ofthe Internet Archive!). The years went by, and as [Tim Bray reflected back in 2007](https://www.tbray.org/ongoing/When/200x/2007/04/27/BSC) Tim Bray reflected back in 2007 , blogging at Sun was essentially without downside. While I absolutely agree, it’s hard for me not to be a little bittersweet about that fifteen years later: there was *so* so much great content that the only downside – such as it was – was that it was shackled to a listing corporate vessel. And when that vessel sank, much of the content went to a watery grave (or would have, had it not been for the heroics of [the Internet Archive](https://web.archive.org/) the Internet Archive !). Speaking for myself, when it came time to saygood-bye to Sun, I didn’t want to leave my writing behind to its own fate. Fortunately, Sun had had the foresight to make clear to us that we ourselves owned our own writing, and I was able to easily export my data out of Sun to re-host it elsewhere. Even though I wasgoing to work for a cloud providerI had not wanted to co-mingle my future job with my present one, so I did as one did: I created a WordPress blog on a third-party site. This WordPress site had the curse of beingjustgood enough, and even after being at Joyent, moving it was never quite seemed worth it. Speaking for myself, when it came time to say [good-bye to Sun](/2010/07/25/good-bye-sun/) good-bye to Sun , I didn’t want to leave my writing behind to its own fate. Fortunately, Sun had had the foresight to make clear to us that we ourselves owned our own writing, and I was able to easily export my data out of Sun to re-host it elsewhere. Even though I was [going to work for a cloud provider](/2010/07/30/hello-joyent/) going to work for a cloud provider I had not wanted to co-mingle my future job with my present one, so I did as one did: I created a WordPress blog on a third-party site. This WordPress site had the curse of being *just* just good enough, and even after being at Joyent, moving it was never quite seemed worth it. I continued to blog, though now with a cadence that was reduced due to the presence of microblogging (viz. our first two kids – born in2004and2007– were announced with blog posts; our third – born in2012– with a tweet). Having a new vector for hot takes meant that blogging could be reserved for long-form writing (or, occasionally,long-form hot takes); when we released something new at Joyent – likeKVM,Manta, orTriton– I used blogging to tell some of the human side of the story. I continued to blog, though now with a cadence that was reduced due to the presence of microblogging (viz. our first two kids – born in [2004](/2004/09/28/tobin-cormac-gaffikin-cantrill/) 2004 and [2007](/2007/06/23/alexander-morgan-gaffikin-cantrill/) 2007 – were announced with blog posts; our third – born in [2012](https://x.com/bcantrill/status/200764623824240640) 2012 – with a tweet). Having a new vector for hot takes meant that blogging could be reserved for long-form writing (or, occasionally, [long-form hot takes](/2016/01/22/unikernels-are-unfit-for-production/) long-form hot takes ); when we released something new at Joyent – like [KVM](/2011/08/15/kvm-on-illumos/) KVM , [Manta](/2013/06/25/manta-from-revelation-to-product/) Manta , or [Triton](/2015/03/24/triton-docker-and-the-best-of-all-worlds/) Triton – I used blogging to tell some of the human side of the story. Years passed.Joyent was bought by Samsung.I fell in love with Rust.I left Joyentandstarted Oxide. At Oxide, long-form writing remained important as ever, and I used blogging to not just talk about our technologies (likeHubris and Humility) but also to talk about why we were building the company the way were building it, from specifics likeour approach to compensationto our more general thoughts onengineering a culture. Years passed. [Joyent was bought by Samsung](/2016/06/15/samsung-acquires-joyent-a-ctos-perspective/) Joyent was bought by Samsung . [I fell in love with Rust](/2018/09/18/falling-in-love-with-rust/) I fell in love with Rust . [I left Joyent](/2019/07/31/ex-joyeur/) I left Joyent and [started Oxide](/2019/12/02/the-soul-of-a-new-computer-company/) started Oxide . At Oxide, long-form writing remained important as ever, and I used blogging to not just talk about our technologies (like [Hubris and Humility](/2021/11/30/hubris-and-humility/) Hubris and Humility ) but also to talk about why we were building the company the way were building it, from specifics like [our approach to compensation](/2021/03/03/compensation-as-a-reflection-of-values/) our approach to compensation to our more general thoughts on [engineering a culture](/2024/03/31/engineering-a-culture/) engineering a culture . While blogging continued to be important, that hosted WordPress lifeboat that I scrambled aboard in 2010 was becomingreallyproblematic; it would constantly spring new leaks and was rife with security vulnerabilities – and holy moly was it slow! I knew I needed to move my blog to a better spot, but could neverquiteprioritize it… While blogging continued to be important, that hosted WordPress lifeboat that I scrambled aboard in 2010 was becoming *really* really problematic; it would constantly spring new leaks and was rife with security vulnerabilities – and holy moly was it slow! I knew I needed to move my blog to a better spot, but could never *quite* quite prioritize it… Into this stasis, I was approached byPiotr SarnaandCynthia Dunlop, who were working on a new book,Writing for Developers. They had included references to two of my pieces in the book (Rust after the honeymoonandThe relative performance of C and Rust), and they wanted me to write the foreword. Excited that they were taking on this topic and honored that they would ask me to write it, I agreed. In preparation for the launch of the book, Cynthia sent me some thoughtful questions about my own blogging, wondering if I might be willing to blog my answers. Anyone who has seen theOxide hiring processknows that I love reflective questions, and Cynthia asked me some great ones: What blog entry was I most proud of? Which one was most difficult to write? What impact of blogging have I found surprising? What advice would I have for those getting started with blogging? Of course, answering these questions required me to go back and read my older blog entries – and it is with this that I (finally) hit my breaking point with WordPress: if reading a single blog entry was painful, trying to navigate through ~150 of them over twenty years was untenable. The lifeboat had served its duty, but it was now time to beach it and turn it into kindling: to answer Cynthia’s questions, I had to first find the blog a new home. Into this stasis, I was approached by [Piotr Sarna](https://bio.sarna.dev/) Piotr Sarna and [Cynthia Dunlop](https://www.linkedin.com/in/cynthiadunlop/) Cynthia Dunlop , who were working on a new book, [Writing for Developers](https://www.manning.com/books/writing-for-developers) Writing for Developers . They had included references to two of my pieces in the book ( [Rust after the honeymoon](/2020/10/11/rust-after-the-honeymoon/) Rust after the honeymoon and [The relative performance of C and Rust](/2018/09/28/the-relative-performance-of-c-and-rust/) The relative performance of C and Rust ), and they wanted me to write the foreword. Excited that they were taking on this topic and honored that they would ask me to write it, I agreed. In preparation for the launch of the book, Cynthia sent me some thoughtful questions about my own blogging, wondering if I might be willing to blog my answers. Anyone who has seen the [Oxide hiring process](https://rfd.shared.oxide.computer/rfd/0003) Oxide hiring process knows that I love reflective questions, and Cynthia asked me some great ones: What blog entry was I most proud of? Which one was most difficult to write? What impact of blogging have I found surprising? What advice would I have for those getting started with blogging? Of course, answering these questions required me to go back and read my older blog entries – and it is with this that I (finally) hit my breaking point with WordPress: if reading a single blog entry was painful, trying to navigate through ~150 of them over twenty years was untenable. The lifeboat had served its duty, but it was now time to beach it and turn it into kindling: to answer Cynthia’s questions, I had to first find the blog a new home. Alothad changed since 2004, and even since my WordPress lifeboat in 2010. For my blog, I wanted to get away from systems that feel like unnecessarily complicated content management systems. Fortunately,static site generatorsrepresent the approach that I wanted from a blog: blazingly fast, clean, readable on mobile, and (most importantly for someone who was fleeing captive content management for the second time), entirely git-backed. There were some good options to choose from, but I landed onHugo, using thehugo-blog-awesome theme– and Will Boyd’s excellentwordpress-export-to-markdownfor facilitating the migration. A *lot* lot had changed since 2004, and even since my WordPress lifeboat in 2010. For my blog, I wanted to get away from systems that feel like unnecessarily complicated content management systems. Fortunately, [static site generators](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Static_site_generator) static site generators represent the approach that I wanted from a blog: blazingly fast, clean, readable on mobile, and (most importantly for someone who was fleeing captive content management for the second time), entirely git-backed. There were some good options to choose from, but I landed on [Hugo](https://gohugo.io/) Hugo , using the [hugo-blog-awesome theme](https://github.com/hugo-sid/hugo-blog-awesome) hugo-blog-awesome theme – and Will Boyd’s excellent [wordpress-export-to-markdown](https://github.com/lonekorean/wordpress-export-to-markdown) wordpress-export-to-markdown for facilitating the migration. In addition to the rise of static site generators, there of course had been another big change:we shipped the Oxide cloud computer! To allow customers to try out the Oxide rack without needing to first buy one, we stood up an Oxide rack in a datacenter environment, spinning up asilofor folks who want to kick the tires. And increasingly, we use this production rack for our own infrastructure at Oxide. All of this gave me an opportunity for a special homecoming for my blog: it could run on the system that we havebuilt from scratch! A blog may be the simplest possible use case for the Oxide rack, but it was still really fun tousethe product – and (huge credit to the folks buildingthe frontend of the computer)sodamned easy. I especially loved how easy it was to doVPC management, which quickly becomes complicated. In addition to the rise of static site generators, there of course had been another big change: [we shipped the Oxide cloud computer](/2023/10/26/the-cloud-computer/) we shipped the Oxide cloud computer ! To allow customers to try out the Oxide rack without needing to first buy one, we stood up an Oxide rack in a datacenter environment, spinning up a [silo](https://docs.oxide.computer/guides/operator/silo-management) silo for folks who want to kick the tires. And increasingly, we use this production rack for our own infrastructure at Oxide. All of this gave me an opportunity for a special homecoming for my blog: it could run on the system that we have [built from scratch](https://oxide-and-friends.transistor.fm/episodes/tales-from-the-bringup-lab-2021-12-06) built from scratch ! A blog may be the simplest possible use case for the Oxide rack, but it was still really fun to *use* use the product – and (huge credit to the folks building [the frontend of the computer](https://oxide-and-friends.transistor.fm/episodes/the-frontend-of-the-computer) the frontend of the computer ) *so* so damned easy. I especially loved how easy it was to do [VPC management](https://docs.oxide.computer/guides/configuring-guest-networking) VPC management , which quickly becomes complicated. All of this to say: the text you are reading now, dear reader, is being served from a web server running on an instance in a production Oxide rack! All of this to say: the text you are reading now, dear reader, is being served from a web server running on an instance in a production Oxide rack! Having now decades of blogging readily accessible, it would be easy to take on Cynthia’s questions, right? Well, not so fast. It’s indeed easy toread all of my writing, but the more I read, the more ambiguity there was. My decades of blogging were teeming with life: birth (Fishworks,Manta,Oxide,illumos), love (JavaScript,systems,Rust,The Soul of a New Machine) and death (Sun,Solaris). And the death, sadly, was not merely metaphorical; over the years, I memorialized the passing of three people who still had a lot of life in front of them:John Birrell,Khaled Bichara, and – tragically recently –Charles Beeler. Having now decades of blogging readily accessible, it would be easy to take on Cynthia’s questions, right? Well, not so fast. It’s indeed easy to [read all of my writing](/) read all of my writing , but the more I read, the more ambiguity there was. My decades of blogging were teeming with life: birth ( [Fishworks](/2008/11/10/fishworks-now-it-can-be-told/) Fishworks , [Manta](/2013/06/25/manta-from-revelation-to-product/) Manta , [Oxide](/2019/12/02/the-soul-of-a-new-computer-company/) Oxide , [illumos](/2010/08/03/opensolaris-and-the-power-to-fork/) illumos ), love ( [JavaScript](/2008/11/16/on-modalities-and-misadventures/) JavaScript , [systems](/2016/12/21/reflections-on-systems-we-love/) systems , [Rust](/2018/09/18/falling-in-love-with-rust/) Rust , [The Soul of a New Machine](/2019/02/10/reflecting-on-the-soul-of-a-new-machine/) *The Soul of a New Machine* The Soul of a New Machine ) and death ( [Sun](/2010/07/25/good-bye-sun/) Sun , [Solaris](/2017/09/04/the-sudden-death-and-eternal-life-of-solaris/) Solaris ). And the death, sadly, was not merely metaphorical; over the years, I memorialized the passing of three people who still had a lot of life in front of them: [John Birrell](/2009/11/26/john-birrell/) John Birrell , [Khaled Bichara](/2020/02/03/rip-khaled-bichara-1971-2020/) Khaled Bichara , and – tragically recently – [Charles Beeler](/2024/11/12/remembering-charles-beeler/) Charles Beeler . I have written somevery dense technical piecesand taken on somescalding hot topics; I have walked throughhistory’s graveyard,pondered the quality of software, andreflected on its economics. The throughline of two decades of writing, especially for the pieces that have enduring resonance: they reflect the humanity in our endeavor. There is an old adage to “speak from the heart, not from the book”; looking back, I am a bit surprised at the degree that this was true in my own writing. And while I don’t have neat answers to Cynthia’s questions, itdoesleave me with easy advice for would-be bloggers: write from the heart, even if you think no one is reading it; if nothing else, your future self will thank you for it! I have written some [very dense technical pieces](/2005/06/14/opensolaris-sewer-tour/) very dense technical pieces and taken on some [scalding hot topics](/2013/11/30/the-power-of-a-pronoun/) scalding hot topics ; I have walked through [history’s graveyard](/2008/07/18/revisiting-the-intel-432/) history’s graveyard , [pondered the quality of software](/2015/09/03/software-immaculate-fetid-and-grimy/) pondered the quality of software , and [reflected on its economics](/2004/08/28/the-economics-of-software/) reflected on its economics . The throughline of two decades of writing, especially for the pieces that have enduring resonance: they reflect the humanity in our endeavor. There is an old adage to “speak from the heart, not from the book”; looking back, I am a bit surprised at the degree that this was true in my own writing. And while I don’t have neat answers to Cynthia’s questions, it *does* does leave me with easy advice for would-be bloggers: write from the heart, even if you think no one is reading it; if nothing else, your future self will thank you for it!
