---
title: "Systems Software in the Large"
date: 2025-09-18
url: https://bcantrill.dtrace.org/2025/09/18/systems-software-in-the-large/
slug: systems-software-in-the-large
word_count: 1659
---

# Systems Software in the Large Systems Software in the Large Sep 18, 2025 Software is hard (yes, even in an era ofvibe coding), and systems software — the silent engine room of modern infrastructure — is especially so. By design, systems software provides an abstraction for programs, insulating programmers from the filthy details that lie beneath; piercing that abstraction to implement the underlying system is to embrace those details and their gnarly implications. Moreover, the expectation for systems software is (rightly) perfection; a system that is merely functional can be deceptively distant from the robustness required of foundational software. Systems software isn’t the only kind of hard software, of course, and indeed software can be difficult just by nature of its scope and composition: it is hard to build software that is just…​ big. Software that consists of many different modules and components built by multiple people over an extended period of time is known asprogramming in the large, and its difficulties extend beyond the mere implementation challenges of systems software. Software is hard (yes, even in an era of [vibe coding](https://www.pcmag.com/news/vibe-coding-fiasco-replite-ai-agent-goes-rogue-deletes-company-database) vibe coding ), and systems software — the silent engine room of modern infrastructure — is especially so. By design, systems software provides an abstraction for programs, insulating programmers from the filthy details that lie beneath; piercing that abstraction to implement the underlying system is to embrace those details and their gnarly implications. Moreover, the expectation for systems software is (rightly) perfection; a system that is merely functional can be deceptively distant from the robustness required of foundational software. Systems software isn’t the only kind of hard software, of course, and indeed software can be difficult just by nature of its scope and composition: it is hard to build software that is just…​ big. Software that consists of many different modules and components built by multiple people over an extended period of time is known as [programming in the large](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Programming_in_the_large_and_programming_in_the_small#Programming_in_the_large) programming in the large , and its difficulties extend beyond the mere implementation challenges of systems software. Because the difficulties with developing systems software are broadly orthogonal to those of programming in the large, intersecting these two challenges — that is, developing systems software in the large — is to take on the most grueling of projects: it is the stuff of whichmythical man monthsare literally made. Why would anyone ever develop such a system? Because they are often necessary to tackle software’s equivalents of thewicked problem: problems that are not only never completely solved, but also not even really understood until implementation is well underway. There are not pat answers for developing these systems — nor, infamously,silver bullets — they’re just…​ brutal. Because the difficulties with developing systems software are broadly orthogonal to those of programming in the large, intersecting these two challenges — that is, developing systems software in the large — is to take on the most grueling of projects: it is the stuff of which [mythical man months](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Mythical_Man-Month) mythical man months are literally made. Why would anyone ever develop such a system? Because they are often necessary to tackle software’s equivalents of the [wicked problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wicked_problem) wicked problem : problems that are not only never completely solved, but also not even really understood until implementation is well underway. There are not pat answers for developing these systems — nor, infamously, [silver bullets](https://oxide-and-friends.transistor.fm/episodes/no-silver-bullets) silver bullets  — they’re just…​ brutal. This is on my mind because of a talk that we had at OxCon last week. OxCon is our affectionate name for the annual Oxide meetup here in Emeryville, and it’s a highlight of the year for everyone at Oxide. This year more than lived up to our high expectations, replete with cameos from the extraordinaryIBM 26 Interpreting Card Punchandthe Oakland Ballers. At OxCon we like to both reflect back and look forward, so in that spirit, we asked Oxide engineer Dave Pacheco if he might be willing to present on the project he’s been leading the charge on for the past two years: software update. This is on my mind because of a talk that we had at OxCon last week. OxCon is our affectionate name for the annual Oxide meetup here in Emeryville, and it’s a highlight of the year for everyone at Oxide. This year more than lived up to our high expectations, replete with cameos from the extraordinary [IBM 26 Interpreting Card Punch](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2_A_PfLSYOM) IBM 26 Interpreting Card Punch and [the Oakland Ballers](https://bsky.app/profile/bcantrill.bsky.social/post/3lymmhpuoek2s) the Oakland Ballers . At OxCon we like to both reflect back and look forward, so in that spirit, we asked Oxide engineer Dave Pacheco if he might be willing to present on the project he’s been leading the charge on for the past two years: software update. When we shipped the first Oxide rack two years ago, it had the minimum functionality necessary to update all its software in the field. Our priority was to make this update mechanism robust over all else, and we succeeded in the sense that it is indeed robust — but the experience is not yet the seamless, self-service facility that we have envisioned. Software update for the Oxide rack is exactly the kind of wicked problem that necessitates systems software in the large: it is not merely dynamically overhauling a distributed system, but doing so while remaining operable in the liminal state between the old software and the new. Compounding this was the urgency we felt: delivering self-service update is essential to realize our vision of the cloud experience on premises, and our customers needed it as soon as we could deliver it. As if this weren’t enough, the Oxide update problem has an acute constraint not faced by the public clouds: we need to be able to deliver updates across anair gap — we cannot rely on the public cloud’s hidden crutch of operators and runbooks. It is a problem so wicked, you can practically hear it cackle. When we shipped the first Oxide rack two years ago, it had the minimum functionality necessary to update all its software in the field. Our priority was to make this update mechanism robust over all else, and we succeeded in the sense that it is indeed robust — but the experience is not yet the seamless, self-service facility that we have envisioned. Software update for the Oxide rack is exactly the kind of wicked problem that necessitates systems software in the large: it is not merely dynamically overhauling a distributed system, but doing so while remaining operable in the liminal state between the old software and the new. Compounding this was the urgency we felt: delivering self-service update is essential to realize our vision of the cloud experience on premises, and our customers needed it as soon as we could deliver it. As if this weren’t enough, the Oxide update problem has an acute constraint not faced by the public clouds: we need to be able to deliver updates across an [air gap](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Air_gap_(networking)) air gap  — we cannot rely on the public cloud’s hidden crutch of operators and runbooks. It is a problem so wicked, you can practically hear it cackle. Despite the thorniness of the problem, Dave and team had managed to achieve the ambitious milestones that they had set for themselves at OxCon last year, and I was naturally excited for his presentation this year. That said, I wasn’t ready for what was coming: Dave not only described the tremendous work on software update (delving into both the multi-year history of the project and the significant progress since the last OxCon), but also reflected on leading the software update project itself. The result was an absolutely extraordinary talk, not just on the mechanics of software essential to Oxide, but on the unique challenges of systems software in the large. Despite the thorniness of the problem, Dave and team had managed to achieve the ambitious milestones that they had set for themselves at OxCon last year, and I was naturally excited for his presentation this year. That said, I wasn’t ready for what was coming: Dave not only described the tremendous work on software update (delving into both the multi-year history of the project and the significant progress since the last OxCon), but also reflected on leading the software update project itself. The result was an absolutely extraordinary talk, not just on the mechanics of software essential to Oxide, but on the unique challenges of systems software in the large. Dave’s talk dripped with hard-won wisdom, running the gamut from maintaining focus (and the looming specter of what Dave calls "organizational procrastination") to fighting scope creep and the mechanics of specific technical decisions. We felt Dave’s talk to be too good to be kept to ourselves — and thanks to our transparency, nothing in it needs to be secret; we are thrilled to be able to make it generally available: Dave’s talk dripped with hard-won wisdom, running the gamut from maintaining focus (and the looming specter of what Dave calls "organizational procrastination") to fighting scope creep and the mechanics of specific technical decisions. We felt Dave’s talk to be too good to be kept to ourselves — and thanks to our transparency, nothing in it needs to be secret; we are thrilled to be able to make it generally available: This talk is amust watchfor anyone doing systems software in the large, containing within it the kind of lessons that are often onlylearned the hard way. While we think it’s valuable for everyone, should you be the kind of sicko inexplicably drawn to exactly the kind of nasty problems that Dave describes, considerjoining us — there is more systems software in the large to be done at Oxide! This talk is a **must watch** must watch for anyone doing systems software in the large, containing within it the kind of lessons that are often only [learned the hard way](https://speakerdeck.com/bcantrill/things-i-learned-the-hard-way) learned the hard way . While we think it’s valuable for everyone, should you be the kind of sicko inexplicably drawn to exactly the kind of nasty problems that Dave describes, consider [joining us](/careers/sw-control-plane) joining us  — there is more systems software in the large to be done at Oxide!
