---
title: "The right place at the right time"
date: 2026-01-08
url: https://bcantrill.dtrace.org/2026/01/08/the-right-place-at-the-right-time/
slug: the-right-place-at-the-right-time
word_count: 1099
---

# The right place at the right time The right place at the right time Jan 8, 2026 Recently,the New Stack had a pieceexcerpting some ofmy conversation with Gergely Orosz. In introducing me in the piece, Joab Jackson writes "Cantrill has had a knack at being at the right place at the right time." While this is objectively true at some level, it also gave me a double take: it rarelyfelttrue at the time. Recently, [the New Stack had a piece](https://thenewstack.io/bryan-cantrill-how-kubernetes-broke-the-aws-cloud-monopoly/) the New Stack had a piece excerpting some of [my conversation with Gergely Orosz](https://newsletter.pragmaticengineer.com/p/the-history-of-servers-the-cloud) my conversation with Gergely Orosz . In introducing me in the piece, Joab Jackson writes "Cantrill has had a knack at being at the right place at the right time." While this is objectively true at some level, it also gave me a double take: it rarely **felt** felt true at the time. When I entered university in 1992, it didnГўВҖВҷt feel like the right time: the economy for new grads was very grimГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүand I knew plenty of folks who had done at well at top schools who were struggling to find work (and accepting part time jobs that didnГўВҖВҷt need a college degree at all while they searched for something better). I never doubted going to school, but I also have never taken a job for granted. When I entered university in 1992, it didnГўВҖВҷt feel like the right time: the economy for new grads was very grimГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүand I knew plenty of folks who had done at well at top schools who were struggling to find work (and accepting part time jobs that didnГўВҖВҷt need a college degree at all while they searched for something better). I never doubted going to school, but I also have never taken a job for granted. When I fell in love with computer science as an undergraduate and realized that I wanted to become a software engineer, it didnГўВҖВҷt feel like the right time: Ed Yourdon had just writtenThe Decline and Fall of the American Programmer, which boldly told any young computer science student that they were wasting their timeГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүthat all programming jobs would be done by cheap labor abroad. This argument felt wrong, but I was too in love with computer science to be talked out of it anyway. When I fell in love with computer science as an undergraduate and realized that I wanted to become a software engineer, it didnГўВҖВҷt feel like the right time: Ed Yourdon had just written *The Decline and Fall of the American Programmer* The Decline and Fall of the American Programmer , which boldly told any young computer science student that they were wasting their timeГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүthat all programming jobs would be done by cheap labor abroad. This argument felt wrong, but I was too in love with computer science to be talked out of it anyway. When I decided that I was specifically interested in operating systems kernel development, it definitely didnГўВҖВҷt feel like the right time: the conventional wisdom in the mid-1990s was that operating systems were doneГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүthat Unix was in decline and that the future clearly belonged to Microsoft. I ardently disagreed with this, and my conviction brought me in 1996 to the one company that unequivocally shared it: Sun Microsystems. When I decided that I was specifically interested in operating systems kernel development, it definitely didnГўВҖВҷt feel like the right time: the conventional wisdom in the mid-1990s was that operating systems were doneГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүthat Unix was in decline and that the future clearly belonged to Microsoft. I ardently disagreed with this, and my conviction brought me in 1996 to the one company that unequivocally shared it: Sun Microsystems. When the internet exploded in the late-1990s, I wasГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүat lastГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүat the right place at the right time. But it was short-lived: when the Dot Com Boom turned to a Dot Com Bust, we were fighting conventional wisdom yet again. DidnГўВҖВҷt the bust mean that there was no future to this stuff? When the internet exploded in the late-1990s, I wasГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүat lastГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүat the right place at the right time. But it was short-lived: when the Dot Com Boom turned to a Dot Com Bust, we were fighting conventional wisdom yet again. DidnГўВҖВҷt the bust mean that there was no future to this stuff? When we started Oxide in 2019, it was almost comforting when it didnГўВҖВҷt feel like the right time: Sand Hill investors told us that "we only fund SaaS companies", that our $20M seed round was "too big", that "there is no market." (And most absurdly: "if this is such a good idea, why are you the only ones doing it?") Six years laterГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүwith VMware customers wanting to get away from Broadcom and with frontier AI companies realizing that there is (in fact!) a lot of general purpose CPU involved in their workloadsГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүour timing looks perfect, but in fact we are just resilient. When we started Oxide in 2019, it was almost comforting when it didnГўВҖВҷt feel like the right time: Sand Hill investors told us that "we only fund SaaS companies", that our $20M seed round was "too big", that "there is no market." (And most absurdly: "if this is such a good idea, why are you the only ones doing it?") Six years laterГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүwith VMware customers wanting to get away from Broadcom and with frontier AI companies realizing that there is (in fact!) a lot of general purpose CPU involved in their workloadsГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүour timing looks perfect, but in fact we are just resilient. So, my advice: have the courage to follow your heartГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүand disregard what others say about your timing. This is not an assurance of an easy path (to the contrary, going your own way will assuredly be a struggle!), but you will have the solace of knowing that you were true to yourselfГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүthat you did your best work. And who knows: maybe years down the stretch, someone will observe that you have the knack for the very thing that you disregardedГўВҖВҰГўВҖВӢ So, my advice: have the courage to follow your heartГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүand disregard what others say about your timing. This is not an assurance of an easy path (to the contrary, going your own way will assuredly be a struggle!), but you will have the solace of knowing that you were true to yourselfГўВҖВүГўВҖВ”ГўВҖВүthat you did your best work. And who knows: maybe years down the stretch, someone will observe that you have the knack for the very thing that you disregardedГўВҖВҰГўВҖВӢ Note: Also published asa LinkedIn post. *Note: Also published asa LinkedIn post.* Note: Also published as [a LinkedIn post](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/bryan-cantrill-b6a1_recently-the-the-new-stack-had-a-piece-excerpting-activity-7415137978307543040-MpaJ?utm_source=share&utm_medium=member_desktop&rcm=ACoAAAAADUIBvmFvrlB3qaOplWrifjHF0EoJmqg) a LinkedIn post .
