---
title: "Taking a detour from the play list, easily"
date: 2001-10-01
url: http://www.loudthinking.com/archives/00000057.html
slug: loud-thinking-00000057
word_count: 284
---

My play list in WinAmp contains 1.953 songs from Nirvana to Sound of Seduction to Jewel. A diverse selection I usually let the random mode decide how to navigate -- with occasionally intervention of the next button when I differ on the chosen path.

This works fine, most of the time. Except when I want to take a short detour, like sticking around in the Red Hot Chili Peppers section for Otherside and Road Tripping, when Mr. Random picks Californication.

Taking such a detour requires tedious steps of manual interaction:
1. Take WinAmp out of random mode
 Move Californication down five steps the play list to hover right above Otherside.
 Move Road Tripping up four steps to wait just below Otherside.
 Remember to revert to random mode before Parallel Universe hijacks the gentle mode I'm left in coming out of Road Tripping.
 Move all tracks back to their original positions, so I don't disturb the flow when wanting to hear the entire album. (I usually skip this step out of laziness).

This is just enough work to break my concentration on whatever I was really spending my time on.

Enter
**Detour Flags**
(TM?): Users could plant these on any number of songs in their play list, and when the playing song stops, WinAmp takes a detour from current play list and mode of playing to following the flags, before returning to the original course.

In my case, all I would have to do is give Otherside flag 1 and Road Tripping flag 2 when reaching Californication. WinAmp would follow the flags, giving me the best of Red Hot, before handing the direction back to Mr. Random.

My musical adventures would be enriched.
[Would yours?](http://www.loudthinking.com/archives/00000057.html#comments)
