---
title: "Temporary pardon granted (six days to liberation)"
date: 2001-08-01
url: http://www.loudthinking.com/archives/00000035.html
slug: loud-thinking-00000035
word_count: 226
---

Remember
[my plea](https://dhh.dk/archives/00000029.html)
for giving severly messed up specifications a bullet and starting over from scratch? As predicted that didn't happend, and now work have (sorta) started on bringing the mutant patch-work monster to life. We're still just walking around the creature, but he is already howling and growling, threathening to take any enjoyment out of the daily treadmill.

Luckily for me I've been granted a temporary pardon by the powers of education. In six days (that's just three more working days!) I'll get to escape thanks to a excellently timed two-week introduction tour to my new second home (at least mentally) for the next five years.

We'll start out slowly the first week by seeing the school, examining the facilities, and getting told that a higher education is an awesome thing. That's just the appetizer, though. The main course will be served sunday the 26th, where I and 200 other would-be masters of computer science and business will invade the small island of Lolland for five days. Games, booze, and - hopefully - good-spirited people awaits me.

To say I'm looking forward to it would be a great understatement, which is also a little scary. I don't recall ever beeing so excited about something schoollike before. But I guess a three years ride on the Internet development rollercoaster can do funny things to most people.
