---
title: "Don't engange in arguments you're not prepared to lose"
date: 2001-07-01
url: http://www.loudthinking.com/archives/00000008.html
slug: loud-thinking-00000008
word_count: 240
---

I've been thinking about and discussing the noble art of argumentation quite a lot lately, and have reached at least one important milestone in the process. I've come to realise that you shouldn't engange in arguments you're not prepared to lose. Not only because it'll make you look like an idiot to the person(s) you're having the argument with (if you're loosing), but because it halts your ability to learn and to grow as a human being.

Most people (I've meet) enter discussions with the notion that no argument in the world is going to change their position - and most of the times it shows. When you're not interested in listening to what the "opponent" (makes it sound like a battle, which it doesn't have to be) have to say, you're only being quite while he or she speaks out of manners. Of course you're not going to acknowledge that you *gisp* could be wrong or, more likely, just unenlighted when you don't even hear the opposing arguments.

This leads to a stagnation in your learning process. Who would want to give up the chance to be a wiser man because of silly pride? Apparently a lot of people, but it doesn't have to be this way. Come to the realisation that you don't always have to be right and you'll learn something from every argument you engage in. If you can't do that please refrain from joining arguments.
