---
title: "The merits of strong typing"
date: 2002-12-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000074.html
slug: loud-thinking-000074
word_count: 361
---

Like most of the advanced OO features available to Java programmers, strong typing is often labeled superfluous by proponents of weakly typed languages, such as PHP.

The argument is the same as that used against interfaces and abstract classes. It's unnecessary language fluff when all you need is
[common sense programming techniques](http://www.loudthinking.com/arc/000061.html#comments)
.

But the problem with "common sense" is that your idea of what that entrails is different than mine. In lack of language support, every programmer is forced to develop his own work-arounds. That makes it harder for programmers to work together (although coding standards can relieve this problem somewhat within a single organization).

Anyway, here's two primary and one minor benefits inhabiting strong typing:

**Explicit statements of intent**
If you believe that programming is done for "humans first, machines second" then it follows that languages that promote explicit statements of intent are more efficient.

Strong typing is a communication tool for explicit statements of intent backed by the guard of compilation.

Method signatures with strong typing tells you exactly what kind of input they expect and what kind of output they return. And the compiler doesn't allow you to break those rules.

Weakly typing, on the other hand, requires you to be verbose about in- and output requirements in comments and vigilant about checking parameters manually.

**Error prevention by failing at compile time**
Having the compilation guard ensure that methods aren't exposed to types that doesn't meet their signature requirements. It's about failing fast.

In weakly typed languages, you won't be alerted to programming errors, such as parsing a method a string when it expected an array, before a problem arises at runtime. That's expensively late.

**Overloading on type**
It's often the case that you want to differentiate method behavior depending on the parameter type passed. Strong typing makes that very easy and simple.

Imagine you have a method that's supposed to act in one way if it's passed an object and another if it's passed a string. The weakly typed solution is having a single method and manually checking the parameter type and then delegating the action. The strongly typed solution does all of that for you.
