---
title: "Shady methods in the battle for balance"
date: 2002-12-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000069.html
slug: loud-thinking-000069
word_count: 421
---

[Michael Kimsal](http://php.weblogs.com/michael_kimsal_interview)
(
[PHP app framework vendor](http://www.logicreate.com/)
) gives
[his blessing](http://www.phppatterns.com/index.php/forum/message/67/)
of means in justification of the end:

*...certainly there's enough FUD from both Java and .NET folks about what PHP *CAN NOT* do that pieces like this are welcomed if only to attempt to present a bit of balance.*

I believe the exact opposite is true. Stooping to the level of FUD and adopting its shady tactics renders your argument untrustworthy. It robs it of usefulness for anything else than reinforcing misguided zealous pride in the pre-believers, who feel a need to be validated in their choice of language.

Worse than merely being useless, it's actively  damaging the attraction of attention from the .NET and Java camps. You could claim to care little about the opinion held in those camps of PHP, but it would be foolish.

Now I'm going to walk out on a limp here, and likely draw the anger of my fellow expert PHP programmers. But I believe that the programmers in the J2EE and .NET camps are generally better educated, more experienced, and certainly larger in numbers than those of the PHP camp.

(Note that I spoke of generalities. Some PHP programmers are better than some Java and .NET programmers.)

This is a natural consequence of ease of use. PHP requires little programming prowess to get started. You don't have to know much about OOP, type-casting, class loaders, and what have you. You don't even have to compile. It's available at almost any webserver and integrates nicely with HTML from the get go. It's forgiving and informative in error.

Hence, it's perfect for and attracts learners, kind to intermediates, and selectively useful for experts (as is most tools and languages).

But I digress. The important thing is that I believe the world of PHP would do good by approaching Java and .NET in a more peaceful and non-confrontational manner. Show by execution the problems that can be solved simply with PHP -- not by vague and anecdotal comparison.

It's okay to pick common problems, such as a Pet Store, but let the reader deduce his own comparison. It's more creditable.

But I guess it depends on your motivation. If your need for validation in your language of choice is great then the road of spite is tempting. If your desire is to inspire, inform, or even persuade would-be PHP programmers, it certainly is not.

*(So it's language bashing and comparison week at Loud Thinking. May I recommend tuning in next week if this bores you endlessly?)*
