---
title: "Roll on sun and showing off"
date: 2002-05-01
url: http://www.loudthinking.com/archives/00000121.html
slug: loud-thinking-00000121
word_count: 367
---

Seven years. That's how long my trusty blue Bravoblade GLX Rollerblades have been bringing me back and forth, in and out, up and down the streets of Copenhagen. But through all those years, I don't think they've ever been submitted to such intense tough love as the last couple of weeks bearing sunshine has brought.

Practically every day they've been out to slice the asphalt. I'd love to claim it's all for the good of the exercise. Or enjoying the sun. Well, it's also that. But far more importantly, it's about showing off. A newly acquired taste, which goes exceptionally well with high sun, shorts, and a mean looking attitude.

I know, it sounds shallow. And it is. But the rush you get by flying off as the lights turn green, leaving twenty bicycle riders feeling like they aren't moving, is most enjoyable. This is possible because accelerating on a pair of skates beats that of a bicycle almost any day of the week.

Showing off isn't always a sure-fire hit, though. Multiple issues to be aware of. First, you need to make sure there's no hardcore no-way-in-hell-I'm-going-to-let-a-roller-win-this-field guys in the pack of bicycle riders. They can spoil a good blaze to glory quickly (with enough effort, bicycles are faster), which takes away much of the fun.

Second, you need to know when to fold. Accelerating like mad and going the distance is mutually exclusive, hence you need a plan on when to drop out of the race. Usually, all that is needed is a destination close enough from the starting point that'll serve as an acceptable pit stop. Like some shop. Or a pizza joint. It doesn't really matter what.

All that does matter, is that you pick one, because being overtaken by the field of riders you left two light stops back due to running out of juice in your legs is a major disappointment. Keeping an aura of invincibility at all times is part of the role you assume when choosing to show off.

Actually, I feel that urge coming on strongly just now. Oh, yearh. It's there alright. Off to strut my silly, shallow role of bad ass roller dude it is then.
