---
title: "That's just who I am"
date: 2002-11-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000055.html
slug: loud-thinking-000055
word_count: 379
---

Is your idiosyncratic behavior annoying other people? Are you way of telling people what you think of them mean or offensive? Do you act a certain way to a certain situation without explicitly knowing why? Don't bother changing. Don't even bother
*considering*
changing. Just grab another favorite escapisms: "That's just who I am".

It's the easy way out. Never mind that it's based on the falsity that people will accept you for who you are — annoying behavior notwithstanding — and that you should always try to be yourself (at all costs).

Especially the latter of the two is interesting. Why is it that once we've acquired a certain trait or behavioral pattern we should be forced to keep it? We're being fed this nonsense since early childhood and it tends to stick stronger than the contradictions we receive along with it (you should always be nice to other people).

Convincing yourself that there's nothing to do about your present traits or behavioral patterns is a self-fulfilling prophecy. And it's being given all the help it can get from the taboo of personal development.

It's taboo to want to change something about your personality. It's okay to want to loose five pounds, but wishing to be a kinder person is looked down upon.

On my
[bookshelf](http://books.singlefile.com/David/)
there's a single title that gathers more interest than any other:
[How to influence people and win friends](http://books.singlefile.com/David/0671723650)
. It's a book about how to be nicer, a more attentive listener, and generally a better person. It's a book on personal development that I've much enjoyed reading and try (however hard it is at times) to live by in a lot of situations.

But apparently, it's also a book of desperation. The comments I've received have mainly centered about that fact. You have to be desperate to get friends/change yourself if you want to read a book about it. (Bonus implication is that the commenter is fully satisfied with her- or himself).

Bullocks.

You can be however you want to be. You can change. You can learn. The only thing holding you back is a misconceived sense of identity (if I'm not an ass, who am I?) and a fear of what's going to happened after you change. Break free of that. Change.
