---
title: "Observational transformations"
date: 2003-03-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000121.html
slug: loud-thinking-000121
word_count: 280
---

"He is so weird" is a observational transformation that is perpetrated in variations all the time. The author transforms a
*subjective observation*
into a
*objective attribute*
, but neglects to make the transformation explicit and fails to argue its validity.

The problems with observational transformations are:

**A defining and misrepresenting attribute:** Out of the infinite number of attributes that belong to a single person, only one (or a few) gets to represent all the others, which probably doesn't do the rest justice and hence acts as a misrepresentation instead of a definition.

**A closed case once performed:** With the defining attribute(s) identified, it's quickly deemed irrelevant to investigate further, which places everything but the most apparent attributes at a grave disadvantage. Subtlety loses.

**A viral nature:** Defining attributes are so attractive that they don't need to be delivered with much persuasion to spread quickly. Once spread, the link to the original author is lost and along with it access to the implicit arguments that formed basis for the transformation.

Learning to avoid and discourage observational transformations rests on the ability to distinguish between behavioral, appearance, and inherent attributes. The former two exists only as an interpretation and are hence bound to subjectivity, which makes them questionable candidates for defining attributes. The latter, exemplified as "this man has red hair" or "she is 18 years old", belong in the realm of objectivity, and thus makes valid candidates.

I recommend that you try evaluating your observational transformations with the distinction above in mind before uttering said transformations. Hopefully, you'll be able to see when the transformations are lacking in support, avoid lush inductive generalizations, and appear less brass to your fellow man.
