---
title: "End-user conduct agreement?"
date: 2003-06-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000150.html
slug: loud-thinking-000150
word_count: 276
---

The bond between customer and company are bound to grow stronger as companies get more personal with a life narrated in blogs and on discussion boards. This bond can be used as a direct report both ways, but does this mean that it must be used as such? Is it a kind of with-great-power-comes-great-responsibility bond?

In
[Dave Winer's blast](http://scriptingnews.userland.com/backissues/2003/06/08#standardsCompliance)
on TypePads
["touting"](http://www.alistapart.com/stories/typepad/)
of the standards compliance, he seems to think so:

*BTW, without a doubt the users of this product will flame me hard. That's another thing I don't like about this company. They haven't asked their users to back off using flames as a way of forcing their views on others. One of things I'm most proud of about UserLand's customers is that they generally listen to other points of views without trying to silence them.*

Besides noble intentions, this smells like mandating behavior. The heat of flames are relative and subjective. I can't help but feel that Winer is trying to export his moral standards ("UserLand would tell customers not to flame, so must Six Apart") under the pretext of a globally shared imperative.

That's a narrow and selective interpretation of how this newfound bond between companies and customers should be used. It would have been much better served as an open question ("should companies police the customer conduct?") instead of an attack with a side-dish of gross generalization ("UserLand customers are better than MovableType customers").

**Update:**
The whole part about mandating behavior has been changed to "That's life. Onward." Writer's regret?

**Update 2:**
Now the whole thing is gone. It has been replaced with a piece about Six Apart's "funky" support of RSS.
