---
title: "Failures of physical security"
date: 2003-10-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000183.html
slug: loud-thinking-000183
word_count: 238
---

Panther introduces on-the-fly security for your home directory with
[File Vault](http://www.apple.com/macosx/features/filevault/)
and easy encryption of mail exchanges, but loosing my iPod at the Chicago O'Hare airport reminded me that there'll always be a weaker link. This time it was the physical security of my hardware.

So it's not about loosing the iPod as a piece of consumer electronics. That's kind of annoying too, but with 1.5 years in the running it had served it's time well. It's about something more personal.

That iPod held a copy of most of my electronical life on it. Everything from my high school diploma, to budgets on future projects, and my second year exam paper. And tons of sources. Nothing mission critical, like the password to my bank account, but significant personal information never the less.

So I think I know what people who've been burglarized feel. The unnerving sense that a stranger has gone through your things. Your personal belongings. And usually someone who've been burglarized experience this from the "mere" tossing of their drawers and closets.

Now back in the land of the materialistic, I've just received a letter from my insurance company that
*assure*
me that I still have the same coverage — even though they just jacked up my yearly premium by 15%.

*Anyone care to wager whether they'll pick up the cost of reacquisition? Clues on how to best phrase my claim are most welcome as well.*
