---
title: "Why we need dual processor machines"
date: 2003-01-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000111.html
slug: loud-thinking-000111
word_count: 237
---

The most important feature of the PowerMacs is their dual processor setup. This usually doesn't seem to mean a whole lot in benchmarks because they normally just run a single program through the passes. That program has to be specifically designed with dual processors in mind to take advantage of it. Most rarely are.

No, it's all about multitasking. About the system not grinding to a halt when iPhoto needs to rebuild it's index for your 1000 pictures. Or when you're extracting that 200mb compressed file. Or when you're compiling that piece of code that needs to link 20 large libraries.

That's when a dual setup will shine.

The reason for this is that it's very expensive for a processor to switch tasks. When you just have a single processor and 50 active tasks screaming for a slice of the silicon, it's going to spend the majority of it's resources simply switching back and forth between the tasks.

That's a very ineffective mode of operation that hampers the spirit of even the fastest single processor setup.

With two processors there's much less switching going on.  Depending on how smart your OS is at figureing out how to utilize the two processors (and OS X is at least promoted as being pretty smart on this), you can get dramatic performance boosts.

Hopefully I'll soon be able to do a first-hand report on how much it actually matters :).
