---
title: "Fear-driven technology choices"
date: 2004-10-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000333.html
slug: loud-thinking-000333
word_count: 460
---

I think more customers are choosing technology out of fear than good is and many developers are doing a shoddy job standing up to those fears. Customers fear that a world of risk and hurt will come unless they choose "a standard", like Java, C#, or PHP, and by silently bowing in agreement, developers are selling the customer short.

In the advent of highly agile and open source frameworks such as
[Ruby on Rails](http://www.rubyonrails.org)
(and there are many others), it has never been easier or safer to "experiment" with new technology. Unlike the days of old, it no longer requires an engagement with a vendor and a blind bet on his treasury box of magic tricks. Vendor has turned community and the treasure box has turned transparent.

From the feedback I'm getting, most developers have a pretty good grip on how Rails is going to help them within a few hours. After about a day they're usually pretty convinced. And after a week, all I have talked to are turning out working software at high velocity.

With the barrier for examination so incredible low, there's simple no excuse to instinctively reach for the bow as the first response to fear. As much as it delights me to read Matt Raible write about
[his enthusiasm with Rails](http://raibledesigns.com/comments/rd/sunsets/rails_the_mvc_framework_for)
:

*After watching [the video](http://media.nextangle.com/rails/rails_setup.mov) this morning, it's enough to make me want to become a Ruby developer and use Rails to develop my next webapp.*

I'm am equally disappointed by his defeat by default when he his mind wanders on to the possibility of actually using this stuff:

*Then again, Ruby probably doesn't pay the bills nearly as well.*

So maybe that's just Matt, right? Wrong. This depressing pessimism is pervasive. David Crow
[chimes in with enthusiasm](http://davidcrow.ca/2004/10/25/ruby_on_rails.html)
:

*Matt Raible points me to the Ruby on Rails quick setup video. Damn, that is impressive! After spending all weekend fighting with data objects and PHP, I need to spend more time with Ruby and Ruby on Rails.*

And then follows the "self-evident truth" of Matt with an immediate dismissal for commercial viability:

*Matt's got it right it might not pay the bills, but it looks like I can learn something.*

As much as I commend both guys for their interest, kind words, and real enthusiasm, I'm frustrated beyond belief by their lack of energy to fight inertia. How can there ever be a better tomorrow if you're not even willing to contemplate fighting for your enthusiasms of today?

If I do anything of significance with Rails, I hope more than else that it's broadening the horizon of customers by inspiring developers to acquire the will to push for their beliefs and enthusiasms.

Customers are sold short when we as developers accept fear-driven technology choices.
