---
title: "Don't try to explain open source to customs"
date: 2004-11-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000351.html
slug: loud-thinking-000351
word_count: 330
---

I learned my lesson: Don't try explain open source to U.S. customs and immigration officer. Developing free software is obviously a suspicious activity that needs to be examined with tough questions and a highly uncomfortable tone.

I didn't even realize that the situation was getting tense before my chit-chat with the customs officer took the following bad turn (after a somewhat failed attempt at making him understand):

**Officer:**
So how do you make your money?
**Me:**
I do training and consulting on how to use the software
**Officer:**
What do you make doing that kind of work?
**Me:**
It's pretty good
**Officer:**
*That's not what I asked you*

The guy actually wanted the figure of my last engagement. I was foolishly thinking that we were having a friendly yet polite chit-chat session where they feel you out. Wrong was I.

So the guy types and types and types (I obviously have a SUSPICIOUS status in my hidden US file now) and finally sends me on to my second-round interview. If I thought that the first one was just a bit uncomfortable, then the second one got downright aggressive. Who do you work for?
[What the fuck is your occupation?](http://www.lyricsroom.net/F/Fugees/The%20Score/The%20Beast.htm)

Maybe not
*fuck*
, but it was definitely an ordeal straightening out that I wasn't breaking any U.S. laws by contracting and developing open source software.

These two gorillas were of course
[(stupid) white men](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/0060392452/002-4812999-2816048?v=glance)
to which I tried my best to keep a friendly report. It was not like I was unwilling to answer their questions or tried to hide any thing.

The contrast to the rest of the security checks were startling. I had my bags to through special x-ray, had my computer and camera examined for traces of explosives or whatever, but all that was just getting the security checks done without the tense attitudes. Of course, all of these security people were either Asian or Indian.

What a horrible customer service experience: Welcome to the United States!
