---
title: "Stop being clever about it"
date: 2004-08-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000281.html
slug: loud-thinking-000281
word_count: 280
---

[Basecamp](http://www.basecamphq.com)
started out with a somewhat elaborate scheme for deciding whether a given project was active or not. It looked at the activity in the project, such as whether any post had been made within the last 30 days or whether there was uncompleted milestones in the future.

The problems with this policy was plentiful:

These problems were made worse by the fact that Basecamp is tiered on the number of active projects you have. So with a Basic subscription capable of 10 active projects, you would have to wait around for a done project to go inactive when bordering the limit before you could start the next active project. While that might have triggered a few premature upgrades, I don't believe that customers would be happy in the long term to pay for a tier that they don't really need (don't be evil and all that).

So
[our solution](http://everything.basecamphq.com/archives/000226.php)
: Stop being clever about it. Just let the customers decide when a project is either active, on hold, or ready for the archives. This realization of course lead to even Less Software. I was able to do a bunch of what I enjoy most about programming — remove code rendered obsolete by simplifications by a deeper understanding of the domain. And I can tell you that I enjoyed yanking every single one of those methods and callbacks.

This of course goes back to the old Word joke
*Are you writing a letter?*
We had the simple answer all along, but refused to realize that we were doing harm in an attempt to do good. Lesson learned. Stop assuming on behalf of a human what cannot be assumed without inconvenience.
