---
title: "Switching to a platform of love"
date: 2004-08-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000264.html
slug: loud-thinking-000264
word_count: 278
---

Jogin tells the story on how he decided it was time to
[part ways with Windows](http://jogin.com/weblog/archives/2004/07/29/crossroad)
and upgrade to a Mac. What should be most disturbing for
[Scoble](http://radio.weblogs.com/0001011/)
and his companions, however, is that Jogin is not switching for what is, but what's to come:

*However, it seems like, — it feels like — Windows is heading back down into the dark abyss of sucking, deeper than they've ventured before. It seems like every week I read or otherwise learn something about the future of Windows, often DMCA related I suppose, and I sigh in relief that by the time it becomes a reality I won't be using a Windows PC anymore.*

I'd find that a pretty scary thought if I were running Microsoft. Here's a guy that's able to cope with the virus/worm plagues and all the hurt with the current Windows, but he's going away because he doesn't like the future of Microsoft offerings dawning on the horizon. Yikes.

I guess that's the trouble of being a company that few to none feels passionate about. Now that a viable alternative is available, people are able to act as the political consumer and vote with their valet.

Like LISP, Smalltalk, Python, and Ruby are languages of love for many, OS X and Linux/FreeBSD are the
*platforms*
of love. And finally, now that the iron grip is going rubber, people are able to switch to peace, love, and harmony.

I hear people talk all the time about how much they love their Mac. For the past two years, I've not meet a single person in real life that has had even remotely similar affections for their Windows box.
