---
title: "The amazing dynamics of Ruby"
date: 2004-11-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000359.html
slug: loud-thinking-000359
word_count: 381
---

I've been programming Ruby for just over a year now. When I started out, I was slightly puzzled over why Ruby had so many introspection hooks and runtime dynamics in it.
*When you would ever need to know programmatically when someone added a method?*

My puzzlement has since turned fascination and my fascination turned complete awe. Matz is indeed a golden god for having the foresight to construct such an incredible rich environment for dynamic programming. As a
[framework](http://www.rubyonrails.org)
[extractor](http://www.basecamphq.com)
, I constantly find new ways to simplify the user experience by discovering the usefulness of yet another hook.

Just yesterday, I improved fixtures handling in Active Record test suites by extending the ever growing domain language of Rails to include the following style:

class PostTest < Test::Unit::TestCase
    fixtures :posts, :comments
  end

This macro-like construct ensures that the database fixtures are properly setup and torn down before each test case, but they also place the actual fixtures themselves in instance variables ready for immediate use:

def test_comments_to_post
    @post_about_yesterday.comments << @fresh_comment
    assert_equal @fresh_comment, @post_about_yesterday.comments.first
  end

"post_about_yesterday" and "fresh_comment" are the file names of two fixtures. I didn't setup these instance variables explicitly. They simply spring to life when one uses the
construct.

Although this is terribly nice and Ruby made the implementation trivial (4 lines of code), it wasn't what I wanted to show you. See, the
construct needs to do work in TestCase#setup, but how can I overwrite that without subclassing TestCase and without making the particular setup explicitly call an additional setup method for the fixtures to work?

In Ruby, easily. I take advantage of a object life-cycle callback named
that can be overwritten for notification. That is  programmatically inform me when someone adds a new method.

With
, I stand guard for a user-added
method, catch the definition, renamed their method to
, inject my own
method that does the fixtures magic, and finally call
. All in measly six lines of code:

def self.method_added(method_symbol)
    if method_symbol == :setup && !method_defined?(:setup_without_fixtures)
      alias_method :setup_without_fixtures, :setup
      define_method(:setup) do
        instantiate_fixtures(*fixture_table_names)
        setup_without_fixtures
      end
    end
  end

This new fixture feature will be part of the upcoming Rails 0.8.5 release.

*Thanks to Xal on [#rubyonrails](http://www.rubyonrails.org/show/IRC) for suggesting the form for `fixtures :posts` and thanks to Nathaniel Talbott for pointing me in the direction of `method_added`.*
