---
title: "The one about the pissed asian cabbie"
date: 2004-11-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000354.html
slug: loud-thinking-000354
word_count: 298
---

So as if
[getting grilled at the border](http://www.loudthinking.com/arc/000351.html)
wasn't enough, I just learned the hard way that VISA doesn't necessarily mean VISA. Apparently, there's a number of different flavors over here in the US. The flavor accepted by cab drivers and most ATMs outside the Union Square area in San Francisco doesn't take kind to expiration dates in 2012 and fancy chip security — like all European countries are switching to.

So I just had an... uhm... "interesting" experience with an asian cabbie that was going to take me down to a store to do a last-minute purchase for a friend. We get all the way down there before his machine finally rejects the card because of "invalid expiration".

Of course, I only have five bucks in cash, which wasn't going to cut it. So following the directions of the guy at Best Buy we drove a bit further down to some shopping district to a Safeway. I get in to get cash out of their Well's Fargo ATMs, which of course doesn't work either. It offered a kind suggestion that I should contact my financial institution, though — thanks Well's!

I try the register, but that won't let me get money out either (but would let me get a coke, yay!). So I have to go back to the cabbie once more and now he's starting to get really unhappy about the situation. After a bit of back and forth, we decide to head back to the Union Square area to try more ATMs, finally finding one that works.

So $25 lighter, I'm back at the hotel without my intended purchase and actually kind of looking
*forward*
to the grueling 15-hour flight back to Denmark tomorrow. It's been great and all, but I'm ready to get home.
