---
title: "RailsConf 2006: Making the ecosystem tangible"
date: 2005-11-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000541.html
slug: loud-thinking-000541
word_count: 257
---

We've just
[announced](http://railsconf.org/articles/2005/11/24/announcing-railsconf-2006)
[RailsConf](http://railsconf.org/)
. It'll be going down on June 22nd through 25th — just a month ahead of the two-year anniversary for Rails. We're envisioning a turn-out of about 400, which might seem pretty bullish now, but I'm confident we'll still be turning people away who wanted to come.

It's certainly a wonderful feeling to be part of this. Announcing RailsConf makes the ecosystem seem so real. That this whole Rails thing is bigger than anyone person, bigger than me, bigger than the core team, bigger than the circle of people that I know doing it. That's a great feeling. It's the feeling of creation.

It'll also be a proof of concept. If we can actually get some 400 people together who are willing to shell out around $350-400, that's a strong signal to potential vendors that there is a market here.

I've been overhearing a lot of very interesting conversations from different corners of the industry about this. There is interest from a wide range of companies, but with a successful RailsConf, we could turn interest into action.

So its exciting. It'll be awesome to have so many Rails developers together for some serious in-depth conversations and presentations. I can't wait to assemble the speaking agenda. Going beyond the bland introduction of "how to make a weblog" should provide for a welcome change of scenery.

Anyway, sign up for
[the RSS feed](http://railsconf.org/xml/rss/feed.xml)
and be alerted as soon as we have more to tell. And, of course, reserve June 22nd through 25th in your calendar.
