---
title: "The horror of software patents and Microsoft"
date: 2005-03-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000424.html
slug: loud-thinking-000424
word_count: 216
---

Software patents are horrible inhibitors of innovation and destructors of the competitive landscape. We need to make this statement early and often every time evil doers like Microsoft attempts to lock down an area of interest in IT or computer science. And this is exactly
[what they're trying to do](http://www.groklaw.net/article.php?story=20050315230914533)
with US patent application #20040210818:

**Word-processing document stored in a single XML file that may be manipulated by applications that understand XML**
*A word processor including a native XML file format is provided. The well formed XML file fully represents the word-processor document, and fully supports 100% of word-processor's rich formatting. There are no feature losses when saving the word-processor documents as XML. A published XSD file defines all the rules behind the word-processor's XML file format. Hints may be provided within the XML associated files providing applications that understand XML a shortcut to understanding some of the features provided by the word-processor. The word-processing document is stored in a single XML file. Additionally, manipulation of word-processing documents may be done on computing devices that do not include the word-processor itself.*

Are you kidding me?! For every step in the right direction of openness and transparency that
[Scoble](http://radio.weblogs.com/0001011/)
is able to take Microsoft, the true nature of the beast unveils itself and goes 10 steps backwards.
