---
title: "Maturity is the new 'does it scale?'"
date: 2005-04-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000434.html
slug: loud-thinking-000434
word_count: 263
---

There's a special magic to catch-all dismissals of new technology. Usually, they start out being fairly generic and vague enough to sorta pass by with enough waving and implied assumptions. But that only works for so long and soon the catch-all dismissal must retreat to higher ground seeking to be ever more generic, vague, and, of course, meaningless.

I'm sensing that "does it scale?" is experiencing the end of its run along this course. A general understanding that scalability is achievable with most modern web-development platforms has left a void for the role of quick dismissal. But what was lost on scalability is quickly recouped with the advent of... wait for it... Maturity!

Maturity is such a wonderful blank that your brain can readily fill with any property that fits for the moment without even being conscious about it. Hence, most everything can be attacked for lacking maturity. It's a great joker that fits in any hand of argument.

Its greatest fallacy is inherent in its close ties to absolute age. Unlike the growing of man, technological progress is less determined by the passing of time than it is the expendure of attention and determination. A focused burst energy, a large enough set of eyes, the right ideas can all be drivers of "maturity".

That is when maturity is played as meaning something more specific, like...

According to these definitions, some projects remains immature years after their premiere, others achieve it in much shorter time.

So please, take the joker out of the deck and replace it with arguments of specificity and clarity.
