---
title: "A fellow countryman on immediacy"
date: 2005-09-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000501.html
slug: loud-thinking-000501
word_count: 239
---

Despite my personal departure from PHP, I still have the gravest respect for Rasmus Lerdorf, his accomplishments, and views on immediacy. Speaking about REST vs SOAP, Rasmus offers
[this compelling comparison](http://toys.lerdorf.com/archives/33-Buzzing-the-Yahoo!-Search-Web-Services.html)
:

*I still much prefer the REST services out there. SOAP always reminds me of being stuck behind the guy in a hat driving a Lincoln Towncar. You eventually get to where you want to go, but the journey is painful. With REST you can just toss your query into your browser and have a look at the returned XML. SOAP starts to make more sense when the queries you are sending get more complex than just tossing a couple of keywords to a search service and setting a couple of flags. But don't even try to read the SOAP spec. If you managed to fight your way through that spec already, try the new WSDL 2.0 Draft Spec. This is the sort of stuff that makes my brain hurt.*

There is a time and day for most solutions, but Rasmus paints a great picture on why REST shares many of the great qualities that made HTML flourish. Immediacy should be a  prime directive for any standard and platform that seeks wide adoption. Rasmus is the king of immediacy.

Nathan
[tells us](http://radar.oreilly.com/archives/2005/08/eurooscon_rasmus_lerdorf_on_ph.html)
that he'll be at EuroOSCON talking about
[Scaling, Securing and Deploying PHP](http://conferences.oreillynet.com/cs/eurooscon/view/e_sess/7639)
. I hope I get a chance to press his hand and say "goddag".
