---
title: "Not so clever; or why I don't like hard problems"
date: 2005-05-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000462.html
slug: loud-thinking-000462
word_count: 487
---

I just discovered
[Kathy Sierra](http://headrush.typepad.com/about.html)
and her
[Creating Passionate Users](http://headrush.typepad.com/creating_passionate_users/)
blog. I'm already signed up for
[her tutorial at OSCON](http://conferences.oreillynet.com/cs/os2005/view/e_sess/7077)
and after reading just a bit from her blog, I couldn't look forward to it more. I basically have an instant reaction to all of the posts I've read or skimmed so far. She seems to be verbalizing a lot of the reasons that I think Ruby on Rails, 37signals, our applications, and my other endeveaurs have made some waves.

But let me riff on just one of them for a while. The idea of
[Hiring Different](http://headrush.typepad.com/creating_passionate_users/2005/05/hire_different.html#comments)
. This rings true to me in a lot of ways because I was never Computer Science Smart. While I can appreciate the beauty of mathematics and algorithms, I could never be that person. I tune out, like I did in high school earning an F in mathematics after a year of copying other people's papers and skipping class as much as possible.

So that's actually why I was in my twenties before I got into programming (that sounds old, but that's recent history when you're 25). I thought that you had to be crazy about math to be a programmer. I feel like that about a lot of subjects forced upon me. I think I've boiled it down to the fact that I don't really like hard problems. That's of course another piece of programming sacrilege. When you watch programming from the outside, everyone seems to love the hard problems and its widely celebrated as the interesting accomplishments.

But there are so many simple problems that haven't been solved. Or haven't been solved well. I'd rather solve them. And if I must tackle a hard problem, which you'll be hardpressed to totally avoid, I'd rather enlist the help of people who like that or judo the hard problem into an easy one. Because for me its all about value (and probably attention span): If you can get those magical 80% of the solution for 20% of the effort, how about just finding a way to cope with the missing 20% of the solution? If you can, you get to solve five easy problems (with comparable value) instead of solving one hard.

Naturally, this doesn't work for all situations or everywhere (I'm guessing). In my current context, building web applications, I've found it to work exceedingly well. And that's of course what makes it interesting in relations to Hiring Different. I would likely not fit into the celebration of hard problems and mathematical aptitude that places like Google, Microsoft, Joel Spolsky, and others see as the filter for good programmers.

And I think that's a shame. Not on my own accord (he said with arms crossed), but for the lack of diversity it creates, as Kathy Sierra notes. And in turn, for the lack of products coming out of that diversity. Products I would have liked to buy and use.
