---
title: "Rails infancy but home-grown dish solid"
date: 2005-04-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000445.html
slug: loud-thinking-000445
word_count: 240
---

For all the flak I've fired at the old boys doing J2EE, it at least appears that they got one lesson down that escapes many PHP programmers I've had words with. Ben Curtis
[demonstrates this disconnect](http://www.bencurtis.com/archives/2005/04/ruby-on-rails-and-php/)
exceedingly well as he labels Rails to be in its infancy:

*Finally, there is youth. Rails is still in its infancy. While that’s a great opportunity for getting in there and being able to make contributions to the core product (I have more ideas than I do time), it’s not so great when you have to do deal with significant changes happening to your framework.*

This is a charge I would expect to hear from someone flaunting the use of "industry standards", such as Struts on Hibernate or whatever the flavor. But get this, Ben Curtis is comparing Rails to a
*home-grown*
soup of hack'a'heel with a dash of ADODB, spiced with some unpolished generators, and then he's "...a little hesitant to use something at version 0.11.1".

Woah?! There's a contradiction if I ever saw one. So Rails is in its infancy with 9 months of rapid improvement by hundreds of contributors, used across hundreds (or thousands?) of applications of various size. But the home-grown dish is the pillar of stability and vintage quality?

Please. Don't be silly now. Your arguments of inertia and a sense of investment might have appeared silly (read up on
[sunk cost](http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?SunkCost)
), but at least they were beliveable.
