---
title: "Rails is global: Beta book sells to 63 countries!"
date: 2005-07-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000482.html
slug: loud-thinking-000482
word_count: 226
---

Open source software has an amazing power to span the world. Before the book has even hit in print, we've shipped the beta PDF to no fewer than 63 countries!

*Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Colombia, Costa, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Faroe Islands, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Scotland, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, South Africa, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan, Thailand, The Netherlands, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United States*

That's on a total of almost three thousand beta books sold! And from book stores around the world, we have another two thousand plus books on order. That brings us
*above 5,000 copies*
of
[Agile Web Development with Ruby](http://www.pragmaticprogrammer.com/titles/rails/index.html)
ordered!

Did I say that the book isn't available in stores before the beginning of August? No wonder it's the most popular book in pre-orders that the Pragmatic Programmers have published yet.

I'm humbled by the intense, overwhelming interest. Once more, thanks so much to everyone that has helped carry the numbers to these heights this fast. I can't wait to hold the print version in my hands come OSCON.

(Yes, I feel every single exclamation mark was essential. Really.)
