---
title: "Growing an open source ecosystem"
date: 2005-07-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000484.html
slug: loud-thinking-000484
word_count: 377
---

While open source is a great model at any scale, it gains an almost unstoppable power as it tips, picks up rapid momentum, and establishes a real ecosystem. For open source projects aiming for a lasting impact, the greatest fear should be obscurity. Sourceforge is littered with open source casulties that didn't manage to get the ball rolling.

Thus, mindshare is paramount. Publicity matters. Passion attracts the next great programmer that'll patch the project past the present and into the next smart evolution. Combine passion with relevance and contemporary significance and you truly have a winning mix.

And few things drive relevance and significance as commercial adoption. Passion for the sake of it can only retain most people for so long. To keep the cooking up it's incredibly helpful to be able to eat off the same plate. Commercial adoption does that. It serves as both a retainer and an accelerator. Get better, faster.

Realizing this, I've been trying to help along this chain of events from the early days of Ruby on Rails. It was apparent in my own work life that the projects I needed to get on with business got a lot more attention than the ones that didn't. Rails was forged in the fires of necessity, driven by the commercial interests of
[37signals](http://www.37signals.com)
. It owes more than technical finesse to that reality. It owes the drive to get out of obscurity.

Naturally, it has not past me by unnoticed that mixing passion, evangelism, and a drive to fight obscurity is an explosive cocktail. I don't believe that you can ignite high emotion without generating backlash as a residue. But it's worth it.

Because once you realize that an healthy ecosystem has arrived, it's overwhelmingly satisfying. To grow something out of nothing...

In the grand scale of things, we're of course still but a tiny blip on the radar. But considering that its been
*less than a year*
since the unveiling of Rails, I think we're doing pretty good. And I don't even want to prophesy what the enumeration of wins will look like a year from now. But I definitely believe that we'll look back at today's excitement and impact and laugh at the humble beginnings.

It's exciting times today and ahead.
