---
title: "Third and final beta of the Rails book"
date: 2005-06-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000473.html
slug: loud-thinking-000473
word_count: 266
---

Dave Thomas has released the third and final beta of the Rails book. It's heading for the publishers some time next week and should be available in hardcopy around the beginning of August. If all goes well,
[Agile Web Development with Rails](http://www.pragmaticprogrammer.com/titles/rails/index.html)
should be here soon indeed.

It's been quite a long process for something that was meant as a quick tutorial-type book at no more than two hundred pages. But what a product coming out in the end. Dave Thomas has been doing an outstanding job on giving all part the framework at least a cursory overview and most parts so much more all combined with easy-to-follow examples (my favorite way of learning for sure). With excellent help from Leon Breedt, Mike Clark, Thomas Fuchs, and Andreas Schwarz, he has steered the book into an essential reference point for any Rails developer.

And the timing has been great. Not only did the beta books hit just as people were crying out the loudest for more documentation, but the final copy will hit just as Rails reaches 1.0. I'm really happy to have been a part of the creation of this defining work. The uptake of Rails will no doubt be helped immensely but this and hopefully the book will also pave the way for the long string of other titles announced.

Once again, thanks a bunch to the ~2,500 people who bought into the idea of the beta book. Hopefully this will encourage even more publishers to try out the format and reinforce the few others already doing it in that it's a great idea.
