---
title: "Reduce the risk, hire from open source"
date: 2005-09-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000505.html
slug: loud-thinking-000505
word_count: 414
---

In the wake of open source, traditional hiring practices seem like an unnecessarily risky way to hire new employees. Especially for small teams where each hire can make it or break it. Why bet the composure of your collective on abstract indicators, hearsay, and a biased bio?

I remember my last interview a few years back for a technical position. I was hired on a shiny CV concocted on own, a few emails back and forth, and a one-hour interview. That's it.

That bothered me even back then. Especially because I kept hearing of that process as the norm. And the effects of it was painfully clear. It's a lot easier to hire someone than to fire them, so most companies would just keep the outcome of their crap shot. Regardless of whether they rolled snake eyes or boxcars.

There had to be a better way. And of course, now there is. Open source is a golden gift to hiring process of technical people. It reduces the risk enourmously by allowing you to sample candidates over a much longer period of time using all the right variables:

This could also have been called People I Wouldn't Hire, Part II (revist
[part I](http://www.loudthinking.com/arc/000433.html)
for a flame fest). I can't imagine hiring someone that I didn't know through open source. I would consider it irresponsible to endanger the composition of 37signals by bringing someone on in the same manner I have personally been hired a good number of times.

Which is of course also why we hired
[Jamis Buck](http://jamis.jamisbuck.org/)
at the beginning of the year. Because I was in awe of his rating on the five qualities listed above by following his releases and his participation in the Ruby community.

Who cared about his GPA (or if he even went to college)? Or that he lived in Provo, Utah? Or how many years of experience he had programming? We didn't. It's simply unnecessary to rely on secondary factors when the work is available to extract values for the five variables listed above.

Open source gives companies a way out of the crap shot. A competitive advantage in picking winners with a much higher rate of success than the guessing, interpolation, and charade of old.

At the same time, open source allows programmers a way to route around dressing up for a meeting with the bank in your Sunday suit. Stop optimizing the secondary factors and focus on what it's all supposed to be about: the craftsmanship.
