---
title: "Only big teams can do big things?"
date: 2005-09-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000508.html
slug: loud-thinking-000508
word_count: 271
---

Mena from Six Apart deserves a lot of credit for taking a stab at
[defending big](http://www.sixapart.com/about/corner/2005/09/in_defense_of_b.html)
in a time where small is the new black. That being said, I'm less fazed by the particulars of argument. But as much as the blogosphere would probably love a good ping-pong duke, I'll reserve my push back for the core underlying assumption: You need to be big to do big.

Never before in the history of the world —
*cue trumpets!*
— has the potential to do extraordinary things been this big for the smallest of teams. The reach of the net, the low/no-cost of infrastructure, and rise of fiercely-productive environments have empowered those with passion near superhuman strength in business, by last-century standards.

I would have thought Mena of all people would have recognized this. Which is why the insinuation that the entrepreneurs of the net face a choice between a life-style, small-potatoes business (where people sleep in the office and are uncountable to their customers) or signing up for a VC-powered 80+ troupe (that can
*really*
make an impact and escape tunnel vision) is so frustratingly disappointing.

What I really want to say is "don't buy it". Don't buy it if you're a customer. Don't buy it if you're an entrepreneur in the making. While the term New Economy rightfully so sunk by the weight of "make marginal losses up on volume" nonsense that it supported, we
*are*
living in a different economy.

It's no longer
*necessary*
to be big to do big. It's optional. Mena and crew chose to do so, but they had every opportunity to have done it differently.
