---
title: "Learning to separate value from cost"
date: 2005-10-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000531.html
slug: loud-thinking-000531
word_count: 363
---

I spent three years at the Copenhagen Business School to largely acquire one skill: The ability to price something at its value, not cost, and feel damn good about it. It sounds trivial, but it can be the hardest thing. Russell Beattie gives you
[the guilt version](http://www.russellbeattie.com/notebook/1008666.html)
:

*Let me make an aside for a moment and say that I’m always fascinated by what I call “natural business people.” These are the folks that have absolutely no problem making money. If I buy something for $2, I have this vague sense of guilt when I turn around and try to sell it for $4, and even worse if I sell it for $6. It may be worth $6 now, but I know how much I bought it for and I feel bad. People like Bill Gates for example, don’t have this problem (remember the story of QDOS as the prototypical example).*

The inability to price at value instead of cost is what separates nice (or niche) businesses from great businesses, what fizzles good ideas, and what turns would-be entrepreneurs into "starved artists".

But its also something that separates people at a moral level. People who charge at value are often labeled as cynical or price gaugers or downright inhuman. It creates a false split between "the compassionate" and "the cold business people". It's probably also one of the prime puzzles for economists: Why is this so hard for "normal people" to understand?

I won't attempt to pontificate on
*why*
, but I will say that the three years was well worth it. Not only as a way of conducting business, but as a way of developing projects and products (even living life, to be grand!). In some ways, I think its my most important skill and asset for programming. The ability to discern value and make calls based on it: Worth it?

This is naturally what attracts me to simple problems. What's the least amount of work I can do that ends up having big value? Before I've cleared all the simple problems of high value, it's just not for me to engage in solving hard problems. Too much risk, not enough ratio.
