---
title: "Outsourcing the performance-intensive functions"
date: 2006-09-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000598.html
slug: loud-thinking-000598
word_count: 599
---

There's a reason we have more than one programming language at our disposal. And it's not just because some people like curly brackets and others like forced indentation. It's because they're actually good at different things. It's usually the overlap areas we debate. Places where one could reasonably argue that more than one language would be a good fit.

It's not so often we argue about the extremes. I don't hear a lot of people claiming that operating systems should be written in PHP. Or that guest books should be written in C. It just appears self-evident that you pick from the sphere of reasonable applicability.

This is true even within single applications. Yahoo mandates PHP at the surface, but uses C++ for most back-ends because they need to handle a few billion page views per day. Amazon too has lots of core computations in C++ (and even Java), yet uses Perl and Mason for the front end. A reasonable division of labour at the biggest sites on the internet.

But we don't need to go to the moon to look at a rock. In
[Basecamp](http://www.basecamphq.com)
, we accept uploads for pictures of people in the project. We just need a 48x48 mug-shot, but plenty of people upload multi-megabyte images, because that's all they've got handy. Now we're completely screwed, right? Ruby is painfully slow, so doing live image manipulation would surely bring us to our knees, right? Here's the method:

I can hear it already: "But that's cheating!" Of course it is. Cheating is good, cheating works.

That's one of the wonders of living in a so-called scripting language. You don't have to invent image resizing from scratch. Someone already did a stellar job in C. You also don't have to invent, say, a Bayesian filter from scratch. Someone probably also did a pretty good job of that in another fast language that you can just call out to.

Most of the time people even institutionalize the cheating by creating thin, native wrappers around C-libraries. For image resizing, there's
[RMagick](http://rmagick.rubyforge.org/)
. For database calls, there's
[MySQL/Ruby](http://tmtm.org/en/mysql/ruby/)
. Hell, even PHP started out being primarily a friendly way to call C functions.

The era of islands is over for most development scenarios. You don't have to make one definitive choice. Instead, you get to hog all the productivity you can for the common cases, then outsource the bottlenecks to existing packages in faster languages or build your own tiny extension when it's needed.

We did the exactly the latter for
[Campfire](http://www.campfirenow.com)
. It has one clearly defined bottleneck. Hundreds of users polling every three seconds for updates. Originally the polling mechanism that handled that was 100 lines of Ruby. We rewrote it over a few hours to 300 lines of C. So we got to keep 90% of the application in Ruby and then we outsourced the bottleneck to C. Writing the entire application in C just so we could get the maximum performance from the polling service would have been madness, so I'm glad we didn't have to choose.

So please don't let bottlenecks (real or imaginary, usually the latter) dictate your choice of software development environment. We have a term for that and it's called premature optimization. I hear Mr. Knuth puts people on trial for exceptionally gross violations. And I fully expect that Mr. Spolsky will be served his papers instructing him to appear before the tribunal shortly.

Just after he explains to the grand jury of Smalltalkers how dynamically-typed languages can't be fast because a method call doesn't compile down to a single CALL instruction.
