---
title: "Calling bullshit on the Enterprise Astronauts"
date: 2006-04-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000578.html
slug: loud-thinking-000578
word_count: 280
---

James McGovern's
[ill-conceived rant](http://www.loudthinking.com/arc/000577.html)
made a strong attempt at rendering the word 'enterprise' equal to, pardon my french,
*bullshit*
, and that's naturally gathering plenty of reactions around the blogosphere.

Microsoft's Dare Obasanjo has
[a menu of great points](http://www.25hoursaday.com/weblog/CommentView.aspx?guid=29b15dde-1c17-4c48-b29d-0104ffefb423)
. Here's the main dish:

*The lesson here is that all this complexity being pushed by so-called enterprise architects, software vendors and big 5 consulting companies is **bullshit**. If you are building distributed applications for your business, you really need to ask yourself what is so complex about the problems that you have to solve that makes it require more complex solutions than those that are working on a global scale on the World Wide Web today.*

That's the wonder of the web. It's so much harder to sell black holes of complexity when transparent examples of easier, simpler, and less are everywhere. You can only peddle a recipe of more software, more layers, more consultants, and more vendors for so long. The success of the web has stamped this strategy with an expiration date.

Now we could of course just abandon big business to the hands of enterprise astronauts and James McGovern's of the world, but that would be too easy. Yes, we could cherish moments of smug self-satisfaction as the towers of ineptness crumble to the hand of competition at some point in the future. But it is nothing against the joy we could have  helping good businesses escape this morass of bad intentions.

So let's keep up the heat. Increase the awareness of alternatives. Strike down the assumptions that big business and big money necessitates the world of hurt that enterprise astronauts carry in their vendor-branded laptop bags.
