---
title: "It Just Doesn't Matter to Shiny Happy People"
date: 2006-03-01
url: https://dhh.dk/arc/000587.html
slug: loud-thinking-000587
word_count: 432
---

Kathy Sierra has yet another fantastic exploration into findings on the brain:
[Angry/negative people can be bad for your brain](http://headrush.typepad.com/creating_passionate_users/2006/04/angrynegative_p.html)
. The basic theory is that being around unhappy people makes you unhappy, so maybe you shouldn't spend too much time around the unhappy, at least not without a conscious decision to do so.

Couldn't agree more! Your brain is a precious piece of work. Allowing it to degrade structurally and chemically by over-exposing it to bad influences is obviously not a good idea. There are communities, people, places, and topics that seem to have inordinate amounts of unhappiness vectors associated with them. Put a mental biohazard sign on those and be sure not to enter without a protection suit. And even stay away if you can. File it under self-preservation.

One of the key indicators that something is wrong with a given environment is its sense of proportions. When an inordinate amount of intensity is allocated to addressing seemingly minor priority, it's a red flag for contamination. You may still be interested in visiting the infected environment, but you should do so consciously with your guards up and be ready to engage in some decompression activity afterwards.

A technique I've personally used to great effect and seen others do the same is It Just Doesn't Matter. It's a pretty universal tool that can be used to deal with most any ambiguous situation. Given incident A, do I choose to respond with X or Y? The incident has already occurred, no way to take that back, so all your response needs to consider is "am I making it better or worse?".

Applying a healthy dose It Just Doesn't Matter gives you distance to the incident and perspective for the time after your reaction. Both important ingredients to a recipe of proportional response.

In a sense, it's like the notion of sunk cost. When deciding what to do today, don't consider what resources you spent yesterday. Those are already gone. The only thing that matters is whether of today's options that'll make the most value going forward.

In other words, it's hard work to be a happy shiny person. There are techniques out there to help you, but it requires intent and action. I, for one, applaud
[Scoble's decision](http://scobleizer.wordpress.com/2006/04/15/halfway-through-my-blog-vacation-change-in-comment-policy/)
to turn down on the knob of negativity that used to be his wasteland of a comments section.

Preserving a healthy chemical balance in your brain is indefinitely more important than allowing some random slob to sling his malice on your domain. Whether or not said malice has strains of truth intertwined or not.
