---
title: "Zig Sema: ZIR => AIR"
date: 2022-02-13
url: https://mitchellh.com/zig/sema
word_count: 4553
---


This is part of the series on [Zig compiler internals](https://mitchellh.com/zig).


The next compiler stage after “AstGen” is “Sema.” Sema is responsible for taking the ZIR output from the AstGen stage and producing AIR. AIR, which stands for “Analyzed Intermediate Representation” is a fully typed intermediate representation, whereas ZIR is an untyped intermediate representation. AIR can then be lowered directly to machine code.


As noted in the AstGen page, one of the reasons ZIR is untyped is because fully typing a Zig program requires comptime evaluation so that generic types (amongst other things) can be fully realized. Therefore, Sema also performs all the comptime evaluation of Zig programs. This is where the magic happens!


AIR is generated per-function instead of per-file like ZIR or the AST. This page will focus on converting function bodies from ZIR to AIR. A future page will talk about how the larger compilation process invokes Sema.


**Note:** There is some AIR that is generated at the file-scope, so it isn’t 100% accurate to say that AIR is generated per-function. However, understanding the file-scope AIR process requires also talking about the compilation process in more depth, and that is defered for a future article. This page will serve as an important building block towards that understanding.


# What Does AIR Look Like?


We can look at example AIR before diving into how AIR is structured and built internally. Here is a simple Zig program and the AIR that it produces:


```zig
export fn add(a: u32, b: u32) u32 {
    return a + b;
}

```


```zig
# Begin Function AIR: add:
  %0 = arg("a", u32)
  %1 = arg("b", u32)
  %2!= dbg_stmt(2:5)
  %3 = add(%0!, %1!)
  %4!= ret(%3!)
# End Function AIR: add

```


You can view AIR for any program by running `zig build-obj --verbose-air <file.zig>`. This will require a debug build of the Zig compiler. There is a guide in the Zig wiki for how to compile the Zig compiler from source.


AIR is generated and rendered per-function. In the output above, you can see the comment-style lines that note the AIR output for the `add` function. Also note that AIR is only generated for exported or referenced functions (it is lazily generated). Therefore, for debugging purposes, I usually `export` the function I want to view the AIR for.


If you’ve been reading about prior stages of the compiler, you’ll notice the rendered form of AIR is very similar to ZIR. While they are similar and in many cases even share instruction tag names, AIR is a completely separate intermediate representation.


The `%1` is the instruction index of an instruction. When it is followed by `!` it means that this instruction is unused or unreferenced by any other known part of the Zig program. In the example above, `%0` and `%1` are both used for the addition instruction to construct `%3`, which is used by the return instruction. But the debug statement `%2` and return result `%4` are unused. Backends that convert AIR to a final format can use this information if it is helpful.


**Note:** As noted in the introduction, there is some AIR that is generated at the file scope and not the function scope. For example, file-scoped variable initialization, comptime blocks, etc. It is not possible currently to render this AIR. File-scoped AIR is usually just a series of `constant` instructions though since it is always comptime-evaluated.


# Anatomy of AIR


Before looking into how ZIR is turned into AIR, I’m going to describe the format of AIR and individual AIR instructions. Understanding the structure of AIR makes understanding the construction of AIR much easier.


The structure of AIR is very similar to ZIR, but with subtle differences:


```zig
pub const AIR = struct {
    instructions: std.MultiArrayList(Inst).Slice,
    extra: []const u32,
    values: []const Value,
};

```


Just like ZIR, AIR is fundamentally a series of instructions stored in the `instructions` field. And similar to ZIR and our AST, instructions may store instruction-specific extra data in the `extra` slice. These two fields behave identically to both ZIR and the AST; if you do not intuitively understand them at this point, I recommend going back and reviewing those structures (particularly the AST structure which goes in depth into how `extra` data is filled).


**Note:** I also skip explaining the `MultiArrayList` here, because this is the identical pattern used with ZIR and the AST and was explained in depth in the parser exploration.


A new field present in AIR is the `values` slice. This contains known values from comptime execution of the ZIR. Instructions may reference comptime known values. For example, if the root of your file has `const a = 42;`, then the value `42` will be stored in the `values` list since it is comptime-known. We’ll see more examples of comptime values later.


Notice that fields such as string tables for string constants are not present. The AIR building process and the future Codegen process that uses AIR continues to have access to the ZIR so that it can lookup data in the ZIR string table.


## Anatomy of a Single AIR Instruction


The structure for a single AIR instruction is the `Inst` struct.


```zig
pub const Inst = struct {
    tag: Tag,
    data: Data,
};

```


This struct is structurally identical to the ZIR `Inst` struct. There is a `tag` which is an enum and then there is tag-specific `data` which is a union of possible data types. The AIR `Tag` and `Data` types are distinct from the ZIR types, but functionally identical.


Let’s look at a basic example. When semantic analysis determines a value is constant, it creates the `.constant` instruction. The data of a `constant`-tagged instruction is the `ty_pl` field which contains the type of the constant and the payload is an index into the `values` array with the comptime-known value.


```zig
const c = 42;

```


```zig
%0 = constant(comptime_int, 42)

```


```zig
Inst{
    .tag = .constant,
    .data = .{
        .ty_pl = . {
            .ty = Type.initTag(.comptime_int),
            .pl = 7, // index into values
        },
    },
};

```


The example above shows the Zig code, the rendered AIR, and the internal instruction representation. note that the `c` is not present anywhere because the ZIR analyzed to create this AIR is only for the right-hand side (rhs) of the assignment: the constant `42`.


# Values, Types, TypedValues


There are three types very frequently used throughout Sema: `Value`, `Type`, and `TypedValue`. A `Value` represents a comptime-known value such as an integer, struct, etc. A `Type` is a comptime-known type such as `u8` (note: all types are comptime-known). And a `TypedValue` is a value with an exact known type: so pairing the value `42` with the type `u16`.


One thing that can be a bit confusing is that types are also valid values in Zigs. A type can be a value with type “type”. For example, in Zig, you can assign `const c = u8`. `c` is type “type” with a value of “u8”.  We’ll show numerous examples below of these scenarios so that this can become more intuitive.


## Values


The `Value` structure is shown below:


```zig
pub const Value = extern union {
    tag_if_small_enough: Tag,
    ptr_otherwise: *Payload,
}

```


A type has a `tag` describing the kind of value it is. I use “kind” here purposefully instead of “type” because a value is untyped although in certain cases the type can be trivially known.  Some `tag` values do not have a payload, while otherwise require a payload. The `ptr_otherwise` field is a pointer to a payload with more information required to get the value.


The `Payload` type is a pointer to the `Payload`-typed field of a more specific payload type. This is one way that polymorphic types are used within Zig. The `@fieldParentPtr` instrinsic is then used to determine the full type. This is a common pattern in Zig and explaining it in further detail is outside the scope of this page. Please search for `@fieldParentPtr` guides and Zig to understand how this works.


### Integer


Let’s look at integer values. The constant `42` is represented using the `Value` below:


```zig
Value{
    .ptr_otherwise = &Payload.U64{
        .tag = .int_u64,
        .data = 42,
    },
};

```


**Note:** The value isn’t *exactly* correct. The `ptr_otherwise` field points to a `Payload` and not the full `Payload.U64` struct. But, the above is more clear about what the intention is so I’ll use this format throughout.


As we can see, the value `42` is represented with the `int_u64` flag. This is because `int_u64` is used to represent all values that can fit within a `u64`. It *does not* mean that `42` is a `u64` type — it may still be a `u8`, `u16`, etc. A `Value` without a `Type` is untyped. Or, if its bothering you that we kind of have a type, you can consider a value as *not exactly typed.*


### Type Values (not TypedValues)


A type can also be a value in Zig. For example, the statement `const c = u8` is completely valid Zig: you’re assigning the type `u8` to the constant `c` which itself has the type `type` (it is a value holding a type). This can be really confusing, and it continues to get more confusing as type values are used in the actual semantic analysis, so it is explained early here.


The constant `u8` as a value is represented using the `Value` below:


```zig
Value{
    .tag_if_small_enough = .u8_type,
};

```


This value has no payload. The value is exactly represented by the tag `u8_type`. The value is the u8 *type*. But the value itself is still *untyped*. However, the type is trivially known in this case because the only valid type for `u8_type` is `type`. But the `Value` struct itself is still technically untyped (for example one day Zig could introduce a keyword `inttype` to represent all integer types, and it would be valid for this value to be either `inttype` *or* `type`).


Let’s look at a more complex type value: `const c = [4]bool`.


```zig
Value{
    .ptr_otherwise = &Payload.Ty{
        .tag = .ty,
        .data = Type{
            // .tag = .array
            // type data including element type (bool), length (4), etc.
        },
    },
};

```


This value has a tag of `.ty` (short for “type”). It is a value that is some type. The payload is the `Type` structure describing an array of 4 boolean elements. We’ll describe the `Type` structure in more detail in the next section. The point here is that `Value` is representing an array *type value* and not an array *value*.


If there is still some confusion, look at the `toValue` function defined for `Type`. A `Type` can always be converted a value, because a type can be a value, but the reverse is not always true.


## Types


The `Type` structure is equivalent to `Value`, but using type-specific types:


```zig
pub const Type = extern union {
    tag_if_small_enough: Tag,
    ptr_otherwise: *Payload,
}

```


There isn’t much to add here, since this behaves almost identically to `Value`. Let’s look at how `[4]bool` is represented so that we have at least one concrete example:


```zig
Type{
    .ptr_otherwise = &Payload.Array{
        .tag = .array,
        .data = .{
            .len = 4,
            .elem_type = Type{.tag_if_small_enough = .bool},
        },
    }
}

```


## TypedValue


A `TypedValue` is just both a `Type` and a `Value` together so that the value is paired with exact type information. Only with both of these together is the exact type of a value known.


```zig
pub const TypedValue = struct {
    ty: Type,
    val: Value,
};

```


# Anatomy of Sema


The next phase in the Zig compiler after “AstGen” is colloquially known as “Sema.” `Sema` is also the struct that is primarily responsible for this phase. The source for Sema is in `src/Sema.zig`. It is a very large file (over 18,000 lines at the time of writing this) and is self-described as “the heart of the Zig compiler.”


There are many public APIs for Sema, but the most important is `analyzeBody`. The `Sema` struct has many fields for internal state. We won’t go through all of them but some of the primary ones are shown below. The fields are not shown in the same order as the source, in order to ease explanation of similar fields.


```zig
pub const Sema = struct {
    mod: *Module,
    gpa: Allocator,
    arena: Allocator,
    perm_arena: Allocator,

    code: Zir,
    owner_decl: *Decl,
    func: ?*Module.Fn,
    fn_ret_ty: Type,

    air_instructions: std.MultiArrayList(Air.Inst) = .{},
    air_extra: std.ArrayListUnmanaged(u32) = .{},
    air_values: std.ArrayListUnmanaged(Value) = .{},
    inst_map: InstMap = .{},

    // other fields...
};

```


The first group are the main required inputs for the Sema process. `gpa` is used to allocate data that lives beyond the Sema process and the declaration lifetime. `arena` is used to allocate temporary data that is freed after Sema. And `perm_arena` is used to allocate data that is tied to the lifetime of the declaration that is undergoing semantic analysis.


`mod` is the module that is being analyzed. Modules aren’t covered in this page, but encapsulates all the Zig code in a single program. We will ignore all module APIs for this page.


The second group are the inputs describing what is being semantically analyzed by Sema. `code` is the ZIR for the file that contains the decl being analyzed. `owner_decl` is typically the declaration being analyzed currently, such as a function, comptime block, test, etc. `func` and `fn_ret_ty` are extra information when a function is being analyzed.


The third group are the outputs of the Sema process. You may notice that these are mostly the fields that construct the `Air` structure. These are populated throughout the Sema process and used to construct the final `Air` result.


The `inst_map` field is particularly important and used throughout Sema. This is a map of ZIR to AIR. Not all ZIR instructions result in AIR instructions, but this is used frequently so that AIR instructions can refer to specific ZIR instructions that are resolved later (i.e. addition operands, function parameters, etc.).


# Analyzing a Function Body


The core function in `Sema` is `analyzeBody`. This is used to analyze the ZIR for a “body” — function body, loop body, block body, etc. — and produce the AIR for that body. The simplest body to look at is a function body. To start, let’s look at a very simple function and the AIR it generates:


```zig
export fn add() u32 {
    return 40 + 2;
}

```


```zig
# Begin Function AIR: add:
  %1 = constant(comptime_int, 40)
  %2 = constant(comptime_int, 2)
  %3 = constant(comptime_int, 42)
  %4 = constant(u32, 42)

  %0!= dbg_stmt(2:5)
  %5!= ret(%4!)
# End Function AIR: add

```


**Reminder:** We can dump the AIR for a function by exporting it and executing `zig build-obj --verbose-air example.zig`.


Without knowing the specifics of AIR instructions, you should be able to figure out what is happening. The rough flow of steps is shown below:

1. We see the untyped constant int `40` (instruction `%1`)
2. We see the untyped constant int `2` (instruction `%2`)
3. We perform the add at comptime and know the result is the untyped constant into `42` (instruction `%3`).
4. The constant `42` is paired with the type `u32` (instruction `%4`). No conversion is necessary since the value `42` fits automatically into the type `u32`. This typing is necessary to match the return type `u32`.
5. We return the value produced in `%4` (instruction `%5`).


Neat! There is some verbosity here, but its clear to see how this implemenets our function `add`. Also, you can see that the comptime evaluation was done and our addition was done in this stage so that the result is already pre-known. When this eventually gets translated down to machine code, the actual addition result is already pre-computed.


Next, let’s see how this AIR was produced, step by step.


## Stepping Through the Function


The primary AIR generation loop is in `analyzeBodyInner` (called by `analyzeBody`). This iterates over the ZIR instructions in order and produces zero or more AIR instructions for each individual ZIR instruction.


```zig
const result = while (true) {
    const inst = body[i];
    const air_inst: Air.Inst.Ref = switch (tags[inst]) {
        .alloc                        => try sema.zirAlloc(block, inst),
        .alloc_inferred               => try sema.zirAllocInferred(block, inst, Type.initTag(.inferred_alloc_const)),
        .alloc_inferred_mut           => try sema.zirAllocInferred(block, inst, Type.initTag(.inferred_alloc_mut)),
        .alloc_inferred_comptime      => try sema.zirAllocInferredComptime(inst, Type.initTag(.inferred_alloc_const)),
        .alloc_inferred_comptime_mut  => try sema.zirAllocInferredComptime(inst, Type.initTag(.inferred_alloc_mut)),
        .alloc_mut                    => try sema.zirAllocMut(block, inst),
        // hundreds more...
    };

    try sema.inst_map.put(sema.gpa, inst, air_inst);
    i += 1;
}

```


This makes it really easy to understand how AIR is produced for a given set of ZIR. You can dump the ZIR and go one instruction at a time and determine how the AIR is produced. The ZIR for our example `add` function above:


```zig
%0 = extended(struct_decl(parent, Auto, {
  [25] export add line(6) hash(4ca8d4e33898374bdeee80480f698dad): %1 = block_inline({
    %10 = func(ret_ty={
      %2 = break_inline(%10, @Ref.u32_type)
    }, body={
      %3 = dbg_stmt(2, 5)
      %4 = extended(ret_type()) node_offset:8:5
      %5 = int(40)
      %6 = int(2)
      %7 = add(%5, %6) node_offset:8:15
      %8 = as_node(%4, %7) node_offset:8:15
      %9 = ret_node(%8) node_offset:8:5
    }) (lbrace=1:21,rbrace=3:1) node_offset:7:8
    %11 = break_inline(%1, %10)
  }) node_offset:7:8
}, {}, {})

```


The function *body* starts at ZIR instruction `%3` and ends at `%9`. `%3` is the first instruction that `analyzeBodyInner` sees when analyzing the `add` function body. The earlier (and later) ZIR instructions such as `%2` and `%10` are analyzed earlier; that process will be discussed a bit later.


### %3: dbg_stmt


The first instruction is `.dbg_stmt`. In the main loop we can see that leads to `zirDbgStmt`. That function is reproduced below in a slightly simplified form:


```zig
fn zirDbgStmt(sema: *Sema, block: *Block, inst: Zir.Inst.Index) CompileError!void {
    const inst_data = sema.code.instructions.items(.data)[inst].dbg_stmt;
    _ = try block.addInst(.{
        .tag = .dbg_stmt,
        .data = .{ .dbg_stmt = .{
            .line = inst_data.line,
            .column = inst_data.column,
        } },
    });
}

```


This is a good, simple example of AIR instructions being translated from ZIR. It doesn’t get any simpler than this. In this case, the `dbg_stmt` ZIR is translated almost exactly to a `dbg_stmt` AIR instruction. This results in the `%0` AIR instruction shown earlier:


```zizig
%0!= dbg_stmt(2:5)

```


### %4: extended(ret_type())


The `.extended` ZIR instruction calls `zirExtended` which loops over the child opcode to map `.ret_type` to `zirRetType`. This function is reproduced below:


```zig
fn zirRetType(
    sema: *Sema,
    block: *Block,
    extended: Zir.Inst.Extended.InstData,
) CompileError!Air.Inst.Ref {
    const src: LazySrcLoc = .{ .node_offset = @bitCast(i32, extended.operand) };
    try sema.requireFunctionBlock(block, src);
    return sema.addType(sema.fn_ret_ty);
}

```


The return type for the function under analysis is available on the `fn_ret_ty` field on `Sema`. The `addType` function will add an instruction for a type definition. For our function, the result type is `u32` which is a well known type which doesn’t generate an additional instruction.


For experimentation, if you change the return value to `u9` — a non-well-known type — the AIR produces the following instruction:


```zig
%5 = const_ty(u9)

```


### %5: int(40)


The `.int` instruction for our constant `40` is next. This leads to the `zirInt` function call in the main analyze body loop. The `zirInt` function reads the int value and calls `addConstant`. Both functions are shown below.


```zig
fn zirInt(sema: *Sema, block: *Block, inst: Zir.Inst.Index) CompileError!Air.Inst.Ref {
    const int = sema.code.instructions.items(.data)[inst].int;
    return sema.addConstant(ty, try Value.Tag.int_u64.create(sema.arena, int));
}

```


```zig
pub fn addConstant(sema: *Sema, ty: Type, val: Value) SemaError!Air.Inst.Ref {
    const gpa = sema.gpa;
    const ty_inst = try sema.addType(ty);
    try sema.air_values.append(gpa, val);
    try sema.air_instructions.append(gpa, .{
        .tag = .constant,
        .data = .{ .ty_pl = .{
            .ty = ty_inst,
            .payload = @intCast(u32, sema.air_values.items.len - 1),
        } },
    });
    return Air.indexToRef(@intCast(u32, sema.air_instructions.len - 1));
}

```


The `addConstant` function is called in many places in Sema to add a comptime-known value. This first adds the type using `addType`, which we saw with the last instruction. In this case, the type is `comptime_int`, which is a well-known type and produces no new instructions. Next, the value is added to `air_values` and finally the `constant` AIR instruction is added to `air_instructions`. This results in the following AIR instruction:


```zig
%1 = constant(comptime_int, 40)

```


One thing to note is that the `.constant` instruction payload references the index into the `air_values` slice. All comptime-known values are stored in `air_values` and any references in the instructions are stored as indexes into the `air_values` slice.


We’ll skip `%6` since it is identical to `%5` but for the constant `2`.


### %7: add(%5, %6)


Next, we have our first real logical operation: addition. The `.add` instruction leads to the `zirArithmetic` function. This function is used for many binary math opeartions. The function is shown below:


```zig
fn zirArithmetic(
    sema: *Sema,
    block: *Block,
    inst: Zir.Inst.Index,
    zir_tag: Zir.Inst.Tag,
) CompileError!Air.Inst.Ref {
    const inst_data = sema.code.instructions.items(.data)[inst].pl_node;
    sema.src = .{ .node_offset_bin_op = inst_data.src_node };
    const lhs_src: LazySrcLoc = .{ .node_offset_bin_lhs = inst_data.src_node };
    const rhs_src: LazySrcLoc = .{ .node_offset_bin_rhs = inst_data.src_node };
    const extra = sema.code.extraData(Zir.Inst.Bin, inst_data.payload_index).data;
    const lhs = sema.resolveInst(extra.lhs);
    const rhs = sema.resolveInst(extra.rhs);

    return sema.analyzeArithmetic(block, zir_tag, lhs, rhs, sema.src, lhs_src, rhs_src);
}

```


All the constant variable assignments at the top are decoding the ZIR instruction. The particularly important assignments are `lhs` and `rhs`. The `resolveInst` function is used to find the AIR instruction index for a given ZIR instruction. So given the `%5` and `%6` ZIR instructions, `lhs` and `rhs` are set to their resulting AIR indexes, respectively. These AIR instructions were set as part of the previous loop iterations which created the `.constant` instructions for the arguments.


**Where is the ZIR ⇒ AIR mapping maintained?** The ZIR to AIR mapping is maintained in the `inst_map` field by the `analyzeBodyInner` loop. There are a couple other places it could be updated but the body loop is the primary location.


This then leads to `analyzeArithmetic`. This is a long function that spends almost all of its lines determining if it can do a comptime-analysis of this arithmetic operation. The key lines are reproduced below:


```zig
const maybe_lhs_val = try sema.resolveMaybeUndefVal(block, lhs_src, casted_lhs);
const maybe_rhs_val = try sema.resolveMaybeUndefVal(block, rhs_src, casted_rhs);

if (maybe_lhs_val) |lhs_val| {
    if (maybe_rhs_val) |rhs_val| {
        if (is_int) {
            return sema.addConstant(
                scalar_type,
                try lhs_val.intAdd(rhs_val, sema.arena),
            );
        }
    }
}

return block.addBinOp(.add, casted_lhs, casted_rhs);

```


It first calls `resolveMaybeUndefVal`. This takes an AIR instruction index and attempts to load the comptime-known value for it. This returns an optional, because the return value will be `null` if the value cannot be comptime-known.


Next, we attempt to unwrap the optionals. If we were able to find comptime-known values for both the `lhs` and `rhs` and they are both integer types, then we can do comptime-addition to produce a final constant. This is what happens for our program to produce the `.constant` AIR instruction with our result `42`:


```zig
%3 = constant(comptime_int, 42)

```


I included the fallthrough in case the values aren’t comptime known: `block.addBinOp`. This would add a `.add` AIR instruction for runtime computation (instead of comptime). To experiment: change the constant `2` into a variable such as `var b: u32 = 2` and use that for the addition. This will produce a `.add` operation because variables can’t be operated on in comptime.


### %8: as_node(%4, %7)


The next instruction implements safe type coercion. Looking at the ZIR, this is converting the add result to the return type. More specifically for what we already know: we must convert the comptime int `42` to a `u32`.


The `.as_node` instruction calls into `zirAsNode` which leads eventually to the core logic in `coerce`. The `coerce` function is used throughout Sema to perform safe type coercision from one type to another.


I’ll leave studying this function up to the reader. The logic is fairly straightforward, but verbose since it has to handle many type coercion cases. For `comptime_int` to `u32`, it is determined that the value fits in a `u32` and the value is returned as-is. No additional processing is required for the type conversion.


### %9: ret_node(%8)


Finally, the `return` instruction is encoded in ZIR as `ret_node`. This leads to `zirRetNode` which creates a `.ret` AIR instruction with the result. There is nothing new or unexplored in the creation of this instruction.


The `zirRetNode` function returns `always_noreturn`. This value forces the `analyzeBodyInner` loop to exit, completing the function body AIR generation.


**`return` always completes function body AIR generation? What about multiple `return` statements?** A return always completes the AIR generation *for the current block*. Unreachable code is illegal and caught during AstGen, meaning the only way for multiple `return` statements is for them to be in different blocks. Therefore, multiple return statements are fine in the context of a function since it’ll recurse into multiple `analyzeBodyInner` calls.


## Comptime Unavailable


The first example we looked at was a little boring, because all of the logic was comptime-capable. Comptime is only available for `const` values and not for `var` values, so we can see the AIR for runtime addition by using a `var`:


```zig
export fn add() u32 {
    var b: u32 = 2;
    return 40 + b;
}

```


```zig
# Begin Function AIR: add:
  %2 = constant(comptime_int, 2)
  %3 = constant(u32, 2)
  %6 = constant(comptime_int, 40)
  %8 = constant(u32, 40)

  %0!= dbg_stmt(2:5)
  %1 = alloc(*u32)
  %4!= store(%1, %3!)
  %5!= dbg_stmt(3:5)
  %7 = load(u32, %1!)
  %9 = add(%8!, %7!)
  %10!= ret(%9!)
# End Function AIR: add

```


Changing a constant `2` to a variable-assigned value of `2` produces a lot more AIR! We now have allocation with `.alloc`, value storage with `.store`, and you can see a runtime `.add` operation, too.


This is a good program to study and trace to learn how AIR is generated. I’ll leave this as an exercise to the reader, since it is following a lot of the same codepaths as our previous example.


## Comptime Target Emulation


For comptime-evaluated code, the Zig compiler emulates the properties of the target platform when necessary. This is a critical feature that makes comptime-evaluation safe and possible within Zig.


An example of this can be seen in the implementation for the `@floatCast`:


```zig
const target = sema.mod.getTarget();
const src_bits = operand_ty.floatBits(target);
const dst_bits = dest_ty.floatBits(target);
if (dst_bits >= src_bits) {
    return sema.coerce(block, dest_ty, operand, operand_src);
}

return block.addTyOp(.fptrunc, dest_ty, operand);

```


The function gets information about the target via `getTarget`, then determines the number of bits a float can support on the target platform. If the destination has more bits than the source, the type can be safely coerced. Otherwise, the float is truncated.


# Completing the Sema Process


Sema is invoked once per function. This is the first process that is run per function rather than per file. Rather than go through every declaration, Sema is invoked once only for each *referenced declaration*. To determine all the referenced declarations, Sema starts at the process entrypoint function.


This implements Zig’s “lazy analysis.” This means that certain errors will not produce compiler errors unless the declaration is referenced. This makes the compilation process extremely fast and the resulting codegen smaller since only referenced code is compiled, but it does result in sometimes confusing behavior.


With the basic knowledge explained in this page, you should be able to follow any Zig program and determine how it is translated to AIR. Remember to use the `zig ast-check` and `zig build-obj --verbose-air` commands frequently to review what the Zig compiler is generating.


After this, the AIR is handed off to the “codegen” process to lower it into a final format. Codegen is the boundary between the shared compiler “frontend” and multiple “backends.” A backend may be LLVM or it could be a native backend such as WASM.
