---
title: "Why Not?"
date: 2026-01-11T00:00:00
tags: ["ai", "thoughts"]
slug: why-not
word_count: 387
source_file: blog/why-not/index.qmd
content_type: blog
---

We are officially now in the era of "why not?". Up until about 10
months ago, it was easy to come up with reasons not to build
things. Coding agents have changed all that.

I remember what we used to say: **too expensive, too much time, not
worth it, too little marginal benefit, does not benefit enough
people**. That's over now.

A side effect of this is that everyone should be asking "why not?" all
the time and daring to build the previously unbuildable or
not-worth-it.

* Why not make dashboards and push notifications to automate your life?
* Why not make iPhone or Android applications for a user base of one?
* Why not build a personalized agent orchestrator?
* Why not ...?

This has been a profound transformation for me since there are a lot
of types of development work that I avoided in the past. Just to name
a few things: sysadmin, homelab, devops/CI/CD, frontend. These things
were my kryptonite, and so I would either not touch them or (in the
case of open source projects or companies) delegate this work to
people who were better at it and enjoyed it. Now all of my skill gaps
have been filled in (at least for the 80% of use cases which turns out
to be good enough for 99% of the work).

I've been having fun doing all kinds of stuff:

* I have a mature homelab setup with 6 machines, unified
  configurations and tools, connected to Tailscale, accessible from
  anywhere in the world. Local LLMs, sandboxed agentic development,
  internal webapps and monitoring. **Why not?**
* I'm building all kinds of full-stack webapps and TUIs, cooking up
  all the things that I've dreamed about but never had the will to
  tackle (because I dislike frontend development or sysadmin/devops
  and mostly because I couldn't spare the time). In addition to the
  [public software](../../software.qmd) I'm pushing out, I have multiple
  extensive private projects that are just for me. **Why not?**
* I'm revisiting all my janky pre-agentic projects and [making them
  better][1]. For example, I now have [auto-generated transcripts and
  summaries for all my talks and podcasts](../../presentations.qmd). **Why not?**

I don't quite know what to think about this weird, exciting new world
we have entered. This Neo-in-the-matrix vibe. But I'm here for it.

**Why not?**

[1]: https://benn.substack.com/p/make-it-better